<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [several thoughts at
once](./som-29.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [cross-realm
correspondences](./som-29.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*29.3* paranomes
----------------

What enables us to comprehend *Mary gives Jack the kite* in so many ways
at once? Different meanings don't conflict when they apply to separate
realms — but that can't be quite what's happening here, since the
physical, social, and mental realms are closely linked in many ways. So
now I'll argue just the opposite, that these meanings are so similar
they don't conflict! Here is my hypothesis about what holds together all
these aspects of our thoughts:

Many of our higher level conceptual-frames are really parallel arrays of
analogous frames, each active in a different realm.

Consider all the different roles played by the Actor pronome of our
sentence. In the physical realm, the Origin of give is Mary's hand. In
the possessional realm of *give and take,* that Origin is in Mary's
estate — since Mary can only give Jack what she owns. Similarly, in the
physical realm, it is the kite itself that moves from Mary's hand to
Jack's; however, in the realm of estates, the kite's ownership is what
*changes hands.*

![](./illus/ch29/29-6.png){.illus}

This suggests that certain pronomes can operate in several different
realms at once. Let's call them *paranomes* to emphasize their parallel
activities. When the language-agency activates some polynemes and
paranomes, these agents run crosswise through the agencies of various
realms to arouse several processes and frames at the same time; these
correspond to different interpretations, in different realms, of the
same phrase or sentence. Then, because each major agency contains its
own memory-control system, the agencies within each realm can
simultaneously apply their own methods for dealing with the
corresponding aspect of the common topic of concern. In this way, a
single language-phrase can at the same time evoke different processes
involved with social dispositions, spatial images, poetical fancies,
musical themes, mathematical structures — or any other assortment of
types of thought that don't interfere too much with one another.

This is not to say that all these different modes of thought will
proceed independently of one another. Whenever any process gains
momentary control over a paranome, many other processes can be affected.
For example, one agency's memory-control process might thus cause the
agencies in several other realms simultaneously to *blink* on and off
their Origin and Destination paranomes. This would force the agencies
active in each of those realms to focus upon whichever types of
differences they then discern; then, in between such episodes, each
agency can apply its own way of thinking to the corresponding topic,
difference, or relationship. By using these cross-connecting polynemes
and paranomes, the activity in each realm can proceed sometimes
independently, yet at other times influence and be affected by what
happens in the other realms.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
