<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the self](./som-4.1.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [the soul](./som-4.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*4.2* one self or many?
-----------------------

One common image of the Self suggests that every mind contains some sort
of Voyeur-Puppeteer inside — to feel and want and choose for us the
things we feel, want, and choose. But if we had those kinds of Selves,
what would be the use of having Minds? And, on the other hand, if Minds
could do such things themselves, why have Selves? Is this concept of a
Self of any real use at all? It is indeed — provided that we think of it
not as a centralized and all-powerful entity, but as a society of ideas
that include both our images of what the mind is and our ideals about
what it ought to be.

Besides, we're often of two minds about ourselves. Sometimes we regard
ourselves as single, self-coherent entities. Other times we feel
decentralized or dispersed, as though we were made of many different
parts with different tendencies. Contrast these views:

SINGLE-SELF VIEW. *I think, I want, I feel. It's me, myself, who thinks
my thoughts. It's not some nameless crowd or cloud of selfless parts.*

MULTIPLE-SELF VIEW. *One part of me wants this, another part wants that.
I must get better control of myself.*

We're never wholly satisfied with either view. We all sense feelings of
disunity, conflicting motives, compulsions, internal tensions, and
dissensions. We carry on negotiations in our head. We hear scary tales
in which some person's mind becomes enslaved by compulsions and commands
that seem to come from somewhere else. And the times we feel most
reasonably unified can be just the times that others see us as the most
confused.

But if there is no single, central, ruling Self inside the mind, what
makes us feel so sure that one exists? What gives that myth its force
and strength? A paradox: perhaps it's because there are no persons in
our heads to make us do the things we want — nor even ones to make us
want to want — that we construct the myth that we're inside ourselves.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
