<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [learning a
script](./som-13.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[duplications](./som-13.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.6* the frontier effect
--------------------------

We can get more insight about children from another experiment of
Piaget's. A child is shown a short block resting on a longer one and is
asked to draw the scene. Next the child is asked to draw a sketch of
what might happen if we pushed the upper block a little to the right. At
first, the result is more or less what we'd expect.

![](./illus/ch13/13-13.png){.illus}

But when we ask the child to do the same repeatedly, we see a strange
result. The top block suddenly grows shorter as it meets the edge of the
long block!

![](./illus/ch13/13-14.png){.illus}

To understand what happened, just put yourself in the child's place.
You've started to draw the upper edge of the short box, but how do you
decide where to stop?

![](./illus/ch13/13-15.png){.illus}

Younger children don't yet possess much ability to draw lines in good
proportion. Instead, they tend to use procedures that locate each new
feature in some recognizable relationship to other features already
represented in the drawing — that is, to *easily described places* that
have previously been depicted. Since there are no such features near the
middle of the long block, the child will use the same method, whatever
it is, for the first few drawings. But it is easy to describe the
location of the end of the long block, and that's why this is where the
younger children tend to stop, once they approach that neighborhood.
Piaget called this the *frontier effect* — the tendency to place new
features at locations that have easily described relationships to other,
already represented features.

Why can't children simply copy what they see? We adults don't appreciate
how complicated copying really is — because we can't recall what it was
like before we learned to do it. To make a good copy, the child would
have to draw each line to a scale and direction consistent with all the
others. But these young children are scarcely able to trace the outline
of an object with a finger; they certainly cannot mentally transport an
entire figure shape from one location to another. So it is actually
easier for the child to do what adults might consider more *abstract*:
first to construct a mental description of the relations involved in the
scene, and then to design a drawing -scheme to represent those
relationships. It can require more skill to produce what we regard as a
simple copy or imitation than to produce what we consider to be an
*abstract* representation!

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
