<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [a world of
differences](./som-23.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [time
blinking](./som-23.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*23.2* differences and duplicates
---------------------------------

It is important for us to be able to notice differences. But this
seemingly innocent requirement poses a problem whose importance has
never been recognized in psychology. To see the difficulty, let's return
to the subject of mental rearrangements. Let's first assume that the
problem is to compare two room-arrangement descriptions represented in
two different agencies: agency A represents a room that contains a couch
and a chair; agency Z represents the same room, but with the couch and
chair exchanged.

![](./illus/ch23/23-2.png){.illus}

Now if both agencies are to represent furniture arrangements in ways
that some third agency D can compare, then the *difference- detecting*
agency D must receive two sets of inputs that match almost perfectly.
Otherwise, every other, irrelevant difference between the outputs of A
and Z would appear to D to be differences in those rooms — and D would
perceive so many spurious differences that the real ones would be
indiscernible!

The Duplication Problem. The states of two different agencies cannot be
compared unless those agencies themselves are virtually identical.

But this is only the tip of the iceberg, for it is not enough that the
descriptions to be compared emerge from two almost identical agencies.
Those agencies must, in turn, receive inputs of near identical
character. And for that to come about, each of their subagencies must
also fulfill that same constraint. The only way to meet all these
conditions is for both agencies — and all the subagencies upon which
they depend — to be identical. Unless we find another way, we'll need an
endless host of duplicated brains!

This duplication problem comes up all the time. What happens when you
hear that Mary bought John's house? Must you have separate agencies to
keep both Mary and John in your mind at once? Even that would not
suffice, for unless both person-representing agencies had similar
connections to all your other agencies, those two representations of
*persons* would not have similar implications. The same kind of problem
must arise when you compare your present situation with some
recollection or experience — that is, when you compare how you react to
the two different partial states of mind. But to compare those two
reactions, what kind of simultaneous machinery would be needed to
maintain both momentary personalities? How could a single mind hold room
for two — one person old, the other new?

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
