<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [memory
rearrangements](./som-15.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[interruption and recovery](./som-15.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*15.8* anatomy of memory
------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag. Your browser does not
support the video tag. Your browser does not support the video tag. Your
browser does not support the video tag.

What controls the working of the mind from one moment to the next? How
do we keep our place when doing complicated jobs, so that when
interrupted from outside — or by another thought from inside — we can
*get back* to where we were, instead of having to start all over again?
How do we keep in mind which things we've tried and what we've learned
along the way, so that we don't go round and round in loops?

No one yet knows how memories control themselves inside our brain;
perhaps each major agency has somewhat different processes, each suited
to the special kinds of jobs it does. The diagram below suggests some of
the sorts of memory-machinery we'd expect to find inside a typical large
agency.

![](./illus/ch15/15-3.png){.illus}

We'll assume that every substantial agency has several
*micromemory-units,* each of which is a sort of temporary K-line that
can quickly store or restore the state of many of the agents in that
agency. Each agency also has several *short-term memory-units,* which
can, in turn, store or restore the states of the micromemories
themselves. When any of these temporary memory-units are reused, the
information that was stored in them is erased — unless it has somehow
been *transferred* into more *permanent* or *long-term* memory-systems.
There is good evidence that, in human brains, the processes that
transfer information into long-term memory are very slow, requiring time
intervals that range from minutes to hours. Accordingly, most temporary
memories are permanently lost.

A growing child acquires many ways to control all these mechanisms.
Accordingly, our diagram includes the flow of information among the
other agencies. Since this memory-controlling agency must also learn and
remember, our diagram includes a memory-system for it as well.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
