<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [micronemes](./som-20.5.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [connections](./som-20.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*20.6* the nemeic spiral
------------------------

Our polynemes and micronemes grow into great branching networks that
reach every level of every agency. They approximate the general form of
a hierarchy, but one that is riddled with shortcuts, cross- connections,
and exceptions. No one could ever comprehend all the details of the
connections that develop inside a single human individual; that would
amount to grasping how all that person's thoughts and inclinations
interact. At best, we can envision only the broadest outlines of such
structures:

![](./illus/ch20/20-4.png){.illus}

In regions near the agencies for speech, some elements of this network
might signify or represent ideas and thoughts we can easily express in
words. But because speaking is a social act, we are far less able to
express the significance of the nemes involved with agencies that are
not directly concerned with communication. This is because those
agencies are less constrained by the discipline of public language;
accordingly, the nemes inside those agencies can vary more from one
person to the next.

In any case, our higher-level agencies are generally unaware of what our
lower-level agents do; they supervise and regulate — but scarcely
comprehend at all — what happens among their subordinates. For example,
a high-level agency might find that a certain subagency is unproductive,
because it is responding to too many micronemes — or to too few — and
adjust its sensitivity accordingly. Like a B-brain, a controlling agency
could make such judgments without comprehending the local meanings of
those micronemes. This could also provide a basis for controlling the
levels of the activities of those other agencies — just as we suggested
when we discussed the idea of a *spiral* computation within an agency
and its K-line trees. When the work appears to be going well, the
supervisor can direct the lower-level processes to *spiral down* toward
small details. But when there seem to be too many obstacles, the level
of activity would be made to *spiral up* instead, to levels capable of
diagnosing and altering an ineffective plan.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
