<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mental
growth](./som-16.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[cross-exclusion](./som-16.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.3* mental proto-specialists
-------------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Suppose you had to build an artificial animal. First you'd make a list
of everything you want your animal to do. Then you'd ask your engineers
to find a way to meet each need.

![](./illus/ch16/16-2.png){.illus}

This diagram depicts a separate agency for each of several *basic
needs.* Let's call them *proto-specialists.* Each has a separate
mini-mind to do its job and is equipped with special sensors and
effectors designed to suit its specific needs. For example, the
proto-specialist for Thirst might have a set of parts like these:

![](./illus/ch16/16-3.png){.illus}

It would not usually be practical to make an animal that way. With all
those separate specialists, we'd end up with a dozen different sets of
heads and hands and feet. Not only would it cost too much to carry and
feed all those organs; they'd also get in one another's way! Despite
that inconvenience, there actually do exist some animals that work this
way and thus can do many things at once. Genetically, the swarms of
social ants and bees are really multibodied individuals whose different
organs move around freely. But most animals economize by having all
their proto-specialists share common sets of organs for their
interactions with the outer world.

![](./illus/ch16/16-4.png){.illus}

Another kind of economy comes from allowing the proto-specialists to
share what they learn. Whether you seek warmth, safety, nutrition, or
companionship — eventually you'll have to be able to recognize and act
in order to acquire the objects you need. So even though their initial
goals are entirely different, all those different proto-specialists will
end up needing to solve the same sorts of *subproblems* — such as
finding ways around obstacles and deciding how to conserve limited
resources. Whenever we try to solve problems of increasing complexity,
whatever particular techniques we already know become correspondingly
less adequate, and it becomes more important to be able to acquire new
kinds of knowledge and skills. In the end, most of the mechanisms we
need for any highly ambitious goal can be shared with most of our other
goals.

When a dog runs, it moves its legs. When a sea urchin runs, it is moved
by its legs. — JAKOB VON UEXKLL

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
