<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [story-frames](./som-26.5.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [frames for nouns](./som-26.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.6* sentence and nonsense
----------------------------

Part of what a sentence means depends upon its separate words, and part
depends on how those words are arranged.

Round squares steal honestly. Honestly steal squares round.

What makes these seem so different in character, when both use the very
same words? I'll argue that this is because your language-agency,
immediately upon hearing the first word-string, knows exactly what to do
with it because it fits a well-established sentence-frame. The second
string fits no familiar form at all. But how do we fit those
sentence-frames? We'll come to that presently, but for the moment, let's
simply assume that our young listener has somehow come to classify words
into various types, like nouns, adjectives, verbs, and adverbs. (We'll
ignore the fact that children go through other stages before they use
words as adults do.) Then our first string of words has this form:

Adjective Noun Verb Adverb Now we'll suppose our listener has learned a
specific recognition- frame that is activated on hearing this string of
particular types of words. This frame then executes a special process
script that makes the following assignments to the terminals of a
Trans-frame. The neme for *steal* is assigned to the Trans-frame's
Action terminal, while the neme for *squares* is attached to the Actor
terminal. The frame then activates scripts that modify the action
*steal* by applying to it the neme for *honestly* and modify the object
*squares* by applying to it the neme for *round.* Up to this point,
everything works smoothly: the language-agency has found a use for every
word. We have special names for the strings of words that we process
with such fluency: we call them *phrases* or *sentences.*

A word-string seems *grammatical* if all its words fit quickly and
easily into frames that connect suitably to one another.

However, at this point some serious conflicts start to appear within
some other agencies because of certain incompatibilities. The frame for
*steal* requires its Actor to be animate. A square can't steal, because
it's not alive! Besides, the frame for *steal* expects an act that's
reprehensible, and that clashes with the modifier for *honestly.* If
that weren't bad enough, our agency for describing shape can't tolerate
the polynemes for *round* and *square* when both are activated at the
same time. It doesn't matter that our sentence is grammatical: so much
turmoil is set up that most of its meaning cancels out and we regard it
as *nonsense.* But it is important to recognize that the distinction
between sense and nonsense is only partly a matter of grammar, for
consider what happens when you hear these three words:

thief -- -- careless -- -- prison --

Although these do not establish any single well-formed grammar- frame,
they activate some word-sense nemes that skip past all our grammar-forms
to fit a familiar story-frame, a moral tale about a thief who's caught
and reaps a just reward. Ungrammatical expressions can frequently be
meaningful when they lead to clear and stable mental states. Grammar is
the servant of language, not the master.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
