<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [suppressors](./som-27.2.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [exceptions to logic](./som-27.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*27.3* censors
--------------

To see what suppressors and censors have to do, we must consider not
only the mental states that actually occur, but others that might occur
under slightly different circumstances.

![](./illus/ch27/27-3.png){.illus}

Suppressors work by interceding to prevent actions just before they
would be performed. This leads to a certain loss of time, because
nothing can be done until acceptable alternatives can be found. Censors
avoid this waste of time by interceding earlier. Instead of waiting
until an action is about to occur, and then shutting it off, a censor
operates earlier, when there still remains time to select alternatives.
Then, instead of blocking the course of thought, the censor can merely
deflect it into an acceptable direction. Accordingly, no time is lost.

Clearly, censors can be more efficient than suppressors, but we have to
pay a price for this. The farther back we go in time, the larger the
variety of ways to reach each unwanted state of mind. Accordingly, to
prevent a particular mental state from occurring, an early-acting censor
must learn to recognize all the states of mind that might precede it.
Thus, each censor may, in time, require a substantial memory bank. For
all we know, each person accumulates millions of censor memories, to
avoid the thought-patterns found to be ineffectual or harmful.

Why not move farther back in time, to deflect those undesired actions
even earlier? Then intercepting agents could have even larger effects
with smaller efforts and, by selecting good paths early enough, we could
solve complex problems without making any mistakes at all.
Unfortunately, this cannot be accomplished only by using censors. This
is because as we extend a censor's range back into time, the amount of
inhibitory memory that would be needed (in order to prevent turns in
every possible wrong direction) would grow exponentially. To solve a
complex problem, it is not enough to know what might go wrong. One also
needs some positive plan.

As I mentioned before, it is easier to notice what your mind does than
to notice what it doesn't do, and this means that we can't use
introspection to perceive the work of these inhibitory agencies. I
suspect that this effect has seriously distorted our conceptions of
psychology and that once we recognize the importance of censors and
other forms of *negative recognizers,* we'll find that they constitute
large portions of our minds.

Sometimes, though, our censors and suppressors must themselves be
suppressed. In order to sketch out long-range plans, for example, we
must adopt a style of thought that clears the mind of trivia and sets
minor obstacles aside. But that could be very hard to do if too many
censors remained on the scene; they'd make us shy away from strategies
that aren't guaranteed to work, and tear apart our sketchy plans before
we can start to accomplish them.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
