<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [accumulation](./som-12.6.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [problems of disunity](./som-12.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*12.7* accumulation strategies
------------------------------

Let's make a dumbbell theory of some people's personalities.

Uniframers disregard discrepancies in favor of imagined regularities.
They tend to be perfectionists but also tend to think in terms of
stereotypes. This sometimes leads to recklessness because they have to
reject some evidence in order to make their uniframes. Accumulators are
less extreme. They keep collecting evidence and hence are much less
prone to make mistakes. But then they're also slower to make
discoveries.

Of course these imaginary personalities are only caricatures, and
everyone blends both extremes. Most people find some reasonable
compromise, though a few of us lean more in one direction than the
other. I'm sure we all use mixtures of different learning strategies

— accumulations of descriptions, K-lines, uniframes, or whatever. On the
surface, it might seem easier to make accumulations than to make
uniframes — but choosing what to accumulate may require deeper insight.
In any case, whenever an accumulation becomes too large and clumsy, we
try to replace some groups of its members with a uniframe. But even when
we succeed in finding a suitably compact uniframe, we can expect it,
too, to accumulate exceptions eventually, since first descriptions
rarely work for all our later purposes.

For example, when a child first encounters dogs, an attempt might be
made to create a uniframe that catalogs those animals' parts — eyes,
ears, teeth, head, body, tail, legs, and so on. But the child will
eventually have to learn that even here there are exceptions.

Furthermore, that uniframe won't help answer the child's most urgent
questions about any one dog in particular: Is it friendly? Does it have
a loud bark? Is it the kind that tends to bite? Each such concern could
require building a different kind of hierarchy-tree.

This leads to an inescapable difficulty. Our various motives and
concerns are likely to require incompatible ways to classify things. You
can't predict a dog's bite from its bark. Each of the classifications we
build must embody different kinds of knowledge, and we can rarely use
more than a few of them at once. When we have a goal that is simple and
clear, we may be able to select one particular kind of description that
makes the problem easy to solve. But when goals of several types
conflict, it is harder to know just what to do.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
