<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [thinking without
thinking](./som-6.8.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [worlds out of
mind](./som-6.10.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.9* heads in the clouds
-------------------------

We'll take the view that nothing can have meaning by itself, but only in
relation to whatever other meanings we already know. One might complain
that this has the quality of the old question, *Which came first, the
chicken or the egg?* If each thing one knows depends on other things one
knows, isn't that like castles built on air? What keeps them from all
falling down, if none are tied to solid ground?

Well, first, there's nothing basically wrong with the idea of a society
in which each part lends meaning to the other parts. Some sets of
thoughts are much like twisted ropes or woven cloths in which each
strand holds others both together and apart. Consider all the music
tunes you know. Among them you can surely find two tunes of which you
like each one the more because of how it's similar to or different from
the other one. Besides, no human mind remains entirely afloat. Later
we'll see how our conceptions of space and time can be based entirely on
networks of relationships, yet can still reflect the structure of
reality.

If every mind builds somewhat different things inside itself, how can
any mind communicate with a different mind? In the end, surely,
communication is a matter of degree but it is not always lamentable when
different minds don't understand each other perfectly. For then,
provided some communication remains, we can share the richness of each
other's thoughts. What good would other people be if we were all
identical? In any case, the situation is the same inside your mind —
since even you yourself can never know precisely what you mean! How
useless any thought would be if, afterward, your mind returned to the
selfsame state. But that never happens, because every time we think
about a certain thing, our thoughts go off in different ways.

The secret of what anything means to us depends on how we've connected
it to all the other things we know. That's why it's almost always wrong
to seek the *real meaning* of anything. A thing with just one meaning
has scarcely any meaning at all.

An idea with a single sense can lead you along only one track. Then, if
anything goes wrong, it just gets stuck — a thought that sits there in
your mind with nowhere to go. That's why, when someone learns something
*by rote* — that is, with no sensible connections — we say that they
*don't really understand.* Rich meaning-networks, however, give you many
different ways to go: if you can't solve a problem one way, you can try
another. True, too many indiscriminate connections will turn a mind to
mush. But well-connected meaning-structures let you turn ideas around in
your mind, to consider alternatives and envision things from many
perspectives until you find one that works. And that's what we mean by
thinking!

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
