<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [k-lines: a theory of
memory](./som-8.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [mental states
and dispositions](./som-8.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.2* re-membering
------------------

Suppose once, long ago, you solved a certain problem P. Some of your
agents were active then; others were quiet. Now let's suppose that a
certain *learning process* caused the agents that were active then to
become attached to a certain agent kP, which we'll call a K-line. If you
ever activate kP afterward, it will turn on just the agents that were
active then, when you first solved that problem P!

![](./illus/ch8/8-1.png){.illus}

Today you have a different problem. Your mind is in a new state, with
agents Q aroused. Something in your mind suspects that Q is similar to P
— and activates kP.

![](./illus/ch8/8-2.png){.illus}

Now two sets of agents are active in your mind at once: the Q-agents of
your recent thoughts and the P-agents aroused by that old memory. If
everything goes well, perhaps both sets of agents will work together to
solve today's problem. And that's our simplest concept of what memories
are and how they're formed.

What happens if the now active agents get into conflicts with those the
K-line tries to activate? One policy might be to give priority to the
K-line's agents. But we wouldn't want our memories to rearouse old
states of mind so strongly that they overwhelm our present thoughts —
for then we might lose track of what we're thinking now and wipe out all
the work we've done. We only want some hints, suggestions, and ideas.
Another policy would give the presently active agents priority over the
remembered ones, and yet another policy would suppress both, according
to the principle of noncompromise. This diagram shows what happens for
each of these policies if we assume that neighboring agents tend to get
into conflicts:

![](./illus/ch8/8-3.png){.illus}

The ideal scheme would activate exactly those P 's that would be most
helpful in solving the present problem. But that would be too much to
ask of any simple strategy.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
