<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the remote-control
self](./som-5.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [fashion and
style](./som-5.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*5.4* personal identity
-----------------------

Why do we accept that paradoxical image of a central Self inside the
self? Because it serves us well in many spheres of practical life. Here
are some reasons to regard a person as a single thing.

The Physical World: Our bodies act like other objects that take up
space. Because of that, we must base our plans and decisions on having a
single body. Two people cannot fit where there is room for only one â€”
nor can a person walk through walls or stay aloft without support.

Personal Privacy: When Mary tells Jack something, she must remember to
*whom* it was told, and she must not assume that every other person
knows it, too. Also, without the concept of an individual, we could have
no sense of responsibility. Mental Activity: We often find it hard to
think two different thoughts at once particularly when they're similar,
because we get *confused* when the same agencies are asked to do
different jobs at the same time.

Why do our mental processes so often seem to us to flow in *streams of
consciousness*? Perhaps because, in order to keep control, we have to
simplify how we represent what's happening. Then, when that complicated
mental scene is *straightened out,* it seems as though a single pipeline
of ideas were flowing through the mind.

These are all compelling reasons why it helps to see ourselves as
singletons. Still, each of us must also learn not only that different
people have their own identities, but that the same person can entertain
different beliefs, plans, and dispositions at the same time.

For finding good ideas about psychology, the single-agent image has
become a grave impediment. To comprehend the human mind is surely one of
the hardest tasks any mind can face. The legend of the single Self can
only divert us from the target of that inquiry.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
