<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Frozen
reflection](./som-6.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the causal
now](./som-6.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.6* momentary mental time
---------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

What do you think you're thinking now? You might reply, *Why, just the
thoughts I'm thinking now!* And that makes sense, in ordinary life,
where *now* means *at this moment in time.* But the meaning of *now* is
far less clear for an agent inside a society.

It takes some time for changes in one part of a mind to affect the other
parts. There's always some delay.

For example, suppose you meet your friend Jack. Your agencies for Voices
and Faces may recognize Jack's voice and face, and both send messages to
an agency Names, which may recall Jack's name. But Voices may also send
a *word-message* to Quotes, a language-based agency that has a way to
remember phrases Jack has said before, while Faces may also send a
message to Places, an agency concerned with space, which might recall
some earlier place in which Jack's face was seen.

![](./illus/ch6/6-2.png){.illus}

Now suppose we could ask both Places and Quotes which had happened
first, seeing Jack or hearing his voice? We'd get two different answers!
Places will first detect the face — while Quotes will first detect the
voice. The seeming order of events depends upon which message reached
each agent first — so the seeming sequence of events differs from one
agent to another. Each agent will react in its own, slightly different
way — because it has been affected by a slightly different *causal
history,* which spreads like a wave into the past.

It is simply impossible, in general, for any agent P to know for certain
what another agent Q is doing at precisely the same time. The best that
P can do is send a query straight to Q and hope that Q can get a
truthful message back before other agents change Q's state — or change
its message along the way. No portion of a mind can ever know everything
that is happening at the same time in all the other agencies. Because of
this, each agency must have at least a slightly different sense both of
what has happened in the past — and of what is happening *now.* Each
different agent of the mind lives in a slightly different world of time.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
