<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [pronomes](./som-21.2.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [communication among
agents](./som-21.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*21.3* *trans*-frames
---------------------

Whenever we consider an action, such as moving from one place to
another, we almost always have particular concerns like these:

Where does the action start? Where does it end? What instrument is used?
What is its purpose or goal? What are its effects? What difference will
it make?

We could represent several of these questions with a simple diagram,
which we'll call the Trans-frame.

![](./illus/ch21/21-2.png){.illus}

In the early 1970s, Roger Schank developed ways to represent many
situations in terms of a relatively few kinds of relations which he
called *conceptual dependencies.* One of these, called P-Trans,
represents a physical motion from one place to another. Another, called
M-Trans, represents the sort of mental transportation involved when John
tells Mary his telephone number; some information *moves* from John's
memory to Mary's memory. A third type of conceptual dependency, called
A-Trans, represents what is involved when Mary buys John's house. The
house itself doesn't move at all, but its *ownership* is transferred
from John's estate to Mary's estate.

But why should we want to represent, in the same way, three such
different ideas: transportation in space, transmission of ideas, and
transfer of ownership? I suspect that it is for the same reason that our
language uses the same word fragment trans for all of them: this is one
of those pervasive, systematic cross-realm correspondences that enables
us to apply the same or similar mental skills to many different realms
of thought. For example, suppose you were to drive first from Boston to
New York, and then from New York to Washington. Obviously the overall
effect would be equivalent to driving from Boston to Washington â€” but
that wouldn't be so *obvious* unless you used a certain kind of mental
chaining skill. Similarly, if John told you his phone number, and you
then told it to Mary, this would end up much as though John had told
Mary directly. And if you first bought John's house and then sold it to
Mary, the net result, again, would be as though Mary had bought it
directly from John. All three forms of Trans-frames can be used in
chains! This means that once you learn efficient chain-manipulating
skills, you can apply them to many different kinds of situations and
actions. Once you know how to do it, constructing mental chains seems as
easy as stringing beads. All you have to do is replace each
Trans-frame's Destination with the next one's Origin.

![](./illus/ch21/21-3.png){.illus}

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
