<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[destructiveness](./som-3.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the
self](./som-4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*3.6* Pain and pleasure simplified
----------------------------------

When you're in pain, it's hard to keep your interest in other things.
You feel that nothing's more important than finding some way to stop the
pain. That's why pain is so powerful: it makes it hard to think of
anything else. Pain simplifies your point of view.

When something gives you pleasure, then, too, it's hard to think of
other things. You feel that nothing's more important than finding a way
to make that pleasure last. That's why pleasure is so powerful. It also
simplifies your point of view.

Pain's power to distract us from our other goals is not an accident;
that's how it helps us to survive. Our bodies are endowed with special
nerves that detect impending injuries, and the signals from these nerves
for pain make us react in special ways. Somehow, they disrupt our
concerns with long-term goals — thus forcing us to focus on immediate
problems, perhaps by transferring control to our lowest-level agencies.
Of course, this can do more harm than good, especially when, in order to
remove the source of pain, one has to make a complex plan.
Unfortunately, pain interferes with making plans by undermining interest
in anything that's not immediate. Too much suffering diminishes us by
restricting the complexities that constitute our very selves. It must be
the same for pleasure as well.

We think of pleasure and pain as opposites, since pleasure makes us draw
its object near while pain impels us to reject its object. We also think
of them as similar, since both make rival goals seem small by turning us
from other interests. They both distract. Why do we find such
similarities between antagonistic things? Sometimes two seeming
opposites are merely two extremes along a single scale, or one of them
is nothing but the absence of the other — as in the case of sound and
silence, light and darkness, interest and unconcern. But what of
opposites that are genuinely different, like pain and pleasure, fear and
courage, hate and love?

In order to appear opposed, two things must serve related goals — or
otherwise engage the selfsame agencies.

Thus, affection and abhorrence both involve our attitudes toward
relationships; and pleasure and pain both engage constraints that
simplify our mental scenes. The same goes for courage and cowardice:
each does best by knowing both. When on attack, you have to press
against whatever weakness you can find in your opponent's strategy. When
on defense, it's much the same: you still must guess the other's plan.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
