<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [traits](./som-5.6.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [insight and introspection](./som-6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*5.7* permanent identity
------------------------

What do we signify by words like *me,* *myself,* and *I*? What does a
story mean that starts with *In my childhood*? What is that strange
possession *you,* which stays the same throughout your life? Are you the
same person you were before you learned to read? You scarcely can
imagine, now, how words looked then. Just try to look at these words
without reading them:

![](./illus/ch5/5-2.png){.illus}

We find it almost impossible to separate the appearances of things from
what they've come to mean to us. But if we cannot recollect how things
appeared to us before we learned to link new meanings to those things,
what makes us think we can recollect how we ourselves appeared to us in
previous times? What would you say if someone asked questions like
these:

*Are you the same person now that you once were, before you learned to
talk?* *Of course I am. Why, who else could I be?* *Do you mean that you
haven't changed at all?* *Of course not. I only mean I'm the same person
— the same in some ways, different in others — but still the same me.*
*But how can you be the same as the person you were before you had even
learned to remember things? Can you even imagine what that was like?*
*Perhaps I can't — yet still there must have been some continuity. Even
if I can't remember it, I surely was that person, too.*

We all experience that sense of changelessness in spite of change, not
only for the past but also for the future, too! Consider how you are
generous to future self at present self's expense. Today, you put some
money in the bank in order that sometime later you can take it out.
Whenever did that future self do anything so good for you? Is *you* the
body of those memories whose meanings change only slowly? Is it the
never-ending side effects of all your previous experience? Or is it just
whichever of your agents change the least as time and life proceed?

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
