<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [papert's
principle](./som-10.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [about
piaget's experiments](./som-10.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*10.5* the society-of-more
--------------------------

Think how many meanings *more* must have! We seem to use a different one
for every sort of thing we know.

More red. More loud. More swift. More old. More tall. More soft. More
cruel. More alive. More glad. More wealthy.

Each usage has a distinct sense, involving different agencies. How could
all these ways to make comparisons get grouped into just one society?
Here's a Society-of-More a child might use to deal with that egg cup
problem.

![](./illus/ch10/10-7.png){.illus}

This society has two main divisions. In its Appearance division, a
Spatial subdivision considers both the increased extent occupied by the
spread-out eggs and also their thinned-out appearance or reduced
density. In the case of those spread-out eggs, these conflict â€” and the
Spatial agency withdraws. Then, if the child can count, Numerical
decides; otherwise the History division applies some agents that use
memories of recent happenings. If some of the eggs were rolled away,
Confined would say that their amount is no longer the same; if the eggs
were merely moved around, Reversible would claim that their amount
cannot have changed.

To solve the water jar problem, the Society-of-More would need other
kinds of lower-level agents:

![](./illus/ch10/10-8.png){.illus}

You might complain that even if we needed these hordes of lower-level
agencies to make comparisons, this system has too many middle-level
managers. But those mountains of bureaucracy are more than worth their
cost. Each higher-level agent embodies a form of *higher-order*
knowledge that helps us organize ourselves by telling us when and how to
use the things we know. Without a many layered management, we couldn't
use the knowledge in our low-level agencies; they'd all keep getting in
one another's way.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
