<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [sensing
similarities](./som-11.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[predestined learning](./som-11.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.6* the centered self
------------------------

How do we learn about the real, three-dimensional world? We've seen how
certain agencies might map the layout of the skin. But how could we
progress from that to learn about the world of space beyond the skin?
One might ask why infants can't simply *look around* to see what's
really going on. Unfortunately, the easy-sounding phrase *simply look*
conceals too many hard problems. When you look at an object, some light
from it shines into your eye and stimulates some sensors there. However,
every motion of your body, head, or eye makes drastic changes to the
image in your eye. How can we extract any useful information when
everything changes so rapidly? Although it should be possible, in
principle, to design a machine that could eventually learn to relate
those motions to the resulting changes in the images, this would surely
take a long time, and it appears that our brains have evolved with
special mechanisms that help us compensate for motions of the body,
head, and eye. This makes it easier for other agencies to learn to use
visual information.

Later we'll discuss some other realms of thought in which we use
analogies and metaphors to change our *points of view.* Perhaps those
wonderful abilities evolved in similar ways, since recognizing that an
object is the same when seen from different views is not so different
from being able to *imagine* things that are not in view at all.

In any case, we really do not understand how the child learns to
understand space. Perhaps we start by doing many small experiments that
lead to our first, crude maps of the skin. Next we might start to
correlate these with the motions of our eyes and limbs; two different
actions that lead to similar sensations are likely to have passed
through the same locations in space. A critical step would be developing
some agents that *represent* a few *places* outside the skin. Once those
places are established (the first ones might be near the infant's face),
one could proceed to another stage: the assembly of an agency that
represents a network of relationships, trajectories, and directions
between those places. Once this is accomplished, the network could
continue to extend to include new places and relationships.

However, this would be only the beginning. Long ago, psychologists like
Freud and Piaget observed that children seem to recapitulate the history
of astronomy: first they imagine the world as centered around themselves
â€” and only later do they start to view themselves as moving within a
stationary universe, in which the body is just like any other object. It
takes several years to reach that stage, and even in their adolescent
years, children are still improving their abilities to envision how
things appear from other viewpoints.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
