<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [innate
geography](./som-11.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the centered
self](./som-11.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.5* sensing similarities
---------------------------

Our ways to think depend in part on how we're raised. But at the start,
much more depends upon the wiring in our brains. How do those
microscopic features work to influence what happens in our mental
worlds? The answer is, our thoughts are largely shaped by which things
seem most similar. Which colors seem the most alike? Which forms and
shapes, which smells and tastes, which timbres, pitches, pains and
aches, which feelings and sensations seem most similar? Such judgments
have a huge effect at every stage of mental growth — since what we learn
depends on how we classify.

For example, a child who classified each fire just by the color of its
light might learn to be afraid of everything of orange hue. Then we'd
complain that the child had *generalized* too much. But if that child
classified each flame, instead, by features that were never twice the
same, that child would often be burned — and we'd complain that it
hadn't generalized enough.

Our genes supply our bodies with many kinds of sensors — external
event-detecting agents — each of which sends signals to the nervous
system when it detects certain physical conditions. We have
sensory-agents in our eyes, ears, nose, and mouth that discern light,
sound, odors, and tastes; we have agents in the skin that sense
pressure, touch, vibration, heat, and cold; we have internal agents that
sense tensions in our muscles, tendons, and ligaments; and we have many
other sensors of which we're normally unaware, such as those that detect
the direction of gravity and sense the amounts of various chemicals in
different parts of the body.

The agents that sense the colors of light in human eyes are much more
complex than the *redness agents* of our toy machine. But this is not
the reason that simple machine can't grasp what Redness means to us —
for neither can the sense detectors in our human eyes. For just as there
is nothing to say about a single point, there's nothing to be said about
an isolated sensory signal. When our Redness, Touch, or Toothache agents
send their signals to our brains, each by itself can only say, *I'm
here.* The rest of what such signals *mean* to us depends on how they're
linked to all our other agencies.

In other words, the *qualities* of signals sent to brains depend only on
relationships — the same as with the shapeless points of space. This is
the problem Dr. Johnson faced when creating definitions for his
dictionary: each separate word like *bitter,* *bright,* *salt,* or
*sweet* attempts to speak about a quality of a sensory signal. But all
that a separate signal can do is announce its own activity — perhaps
with some expression of intensity. Your tooth can't ache (it can only
send signals); only you can ache, once your higher-level agencies
interpret those signals. Beyond the raw distinctiveness of every
separate stimulus, all other aspects of its character or quality — be it
of touch, taste, sound, or light — depend entirely on its relationships
with the other agents of your mind.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
