<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [papert's
principle](./som-10.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [reasoning
about amounts](./som-10.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*10.1* piaget's experiments
---------------------------

The psychologist Jean Piaget was one of the first to realize that
watching children might be a way to see how mind-societies grow. In one
of his classic experiments, he showed a child two matching sets of eggs
and cups — and asked, *Are there more eggs or more egg cups?*

![](./illus/ch10/10-1.png){.illus}

Then he spread the eggs apart — before the child's eyes — and asked
again if there were more eggs or more egg cups.

![](./illus/ch10/10-2.png){.illus}

One might try to explain this by supposing that older children are
better at counting. However, this can't explain another famous
experiment of Piaget's, which began by showing three jars, two filled
with water. All the children agreed that the two short, wide jars
contained equal amounts of liquid. Then, before their eyes, he poured
all the liquid from one of the short jars into the tall, thin one and
asked which jar had more liquid now.

![](./illus/ch10/10-3.png){.illus}

These experiments have been repeated in many ways and in many countries
— and always with the same results: each normal child eventually
acquires an adult view of quantity — apparently without adult help! The
age at which this happens may vary, but the process itself seems so
universal that one cannot help suspecting that it reflects some
fundamental aspect of the child's development. In the next few sections
we'll examine the idea of *more* and show that it conceals the workings
of a large, complex Society-of-More — which takes many years to learn.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
