<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [worlds out of
mind](./som-6.10.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [internal
communication](./som-6.12.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.11* in-sight
---------------

Suppose that while you walked and talked, you could watch the signals
that traverse your brain. Would they make any sense to you? Many people
have done experiments to make such signals audible and visible, by using
biofeedback devices. This often helps a person to learn to control
various muscles and glands that are not usually under conscious control.
But it never leads to comprehending how their hidden circuits work.

Scientists encounter similar problems when they use electronic
instruments to tap into brain signals. This has led to a good deal of
knowledge about how nervous systems work — but those insights and
understandings never came from observation by itself. One cannot use
data without having at least the beginnings of some theory or
hypothesis. Even if we could directly sense all the interior details of
mental life, it wouldn't tell us how to understand them. It might even
make that enterprise more difficult, by overwhelming our capacity to
interpret what we see. The causes and functions of what we observe are
not themselves things we can observe.

Where do we get the ideas we need? Most of our concepts come from the
communities in which we're raised. Even the ideas we *get* for ourselves
come from communities — this time, the ones inside our heads. Brains
don't manufacture thoughts in the direct ways that muscles exert forces
or ovaries make estrogens; instead, to get a good idea, one must engage
huge organizations of submachines that do a vast variety of jobs. Each
human cranium contains hundreds of kinds of computers, developed over
hundreds of millions of years of evolution each with a somewhat
different architecture. Each specialized agency must learn to call on
other specialists that can serve its purposes. Certain sections of the
brain distinguish the sounds of voices from other sorts of sounds; other
specialized agencies distinguish the sights of faces from other types of
objects. No one knows how many different such organs lie in our brains.
But it is almost certain that they all employ somewhat different types
of programming and forms of representation; they share no common
language code.

If a mind whose parts use different languages and modes of thought
attempted to look inside itself, few of those agencies would be able to
comprehend one another. It is hard enough for people who speak different
human languages to communicate, and the signals used by different
portions of the mind are surely even less similar. If agent P asked any
question of an unrelated agent Q, how could Q sense what was asked, or P
understand its reply? Most pairs of agents can't communicate at all.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
