<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [half-brains](./som-11.8.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [learning meaning](./som-12.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.9* dumbbell theories
------------------------

That fascination with those left-right halves, on the part of both the
lay and scientific populace, is nothing really new. It is a symptom of
how we acquire various pairs of words that each divide some aspect of
the world into opposing poles.

![](./illus/ch11/11-4.png){.illus}

Such divisions all have flaws, but often give us useful ways to think.
Dividing things in two is a good way to start, but one should always try
to find at least a third alternative. If one cannot, one should suspect
that there may not be two ideas at all, but only one, together with some
form of opposite. A serious problem with these two-part forms is that so
many of them are so similar. This leads us into making false analogies.
Consider how the pairs below, in which each self is neatly split into
two parts, lead everyone to think they share some common unity.

![](./illus/ch11/11-5.png){.illus}

The items on the left are seen as neutrally objective and mechanical,
and only found within the head. We think of Thought and its associates
as accurate, but rigid and insensitive. The items on the right are seen
as matters of the heart â€” as vital, warm, and individual; we like to
believe that Feeling is the better judge of the things that ought to
matter most. Cool Reason, by itself, seems too impersonal, too far from
flesh; Emotion lies much closer to the heart, but it, too, can be
treacherous, through growing so intense that reason gets completely
overwhelmed.

How marvelous this metaphor! How could it work so well, unless it had
some basic truth? But wait: whenever any simple idea appears to explain
so many things, we must suspect a trick. Before we're drawn into
dumbbell schemes, we owe it to ourselves to try to understand their
strange attractiveness, in order that we not be deceived, as Wordsworth
said, by

. . . some false secondary power, by which, In weakness, we create
distinctions, then Deem that our puny boundaries are things Which we
perceive, and not which we have made.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
