<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [frames for
nouns](./som-26.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [language and
vision](./som-26.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.8* frames for verbs
-----------------------

We've seen how a four-word sentence such as *Round squares steal
honestly* could be made to fit a certain four-terminal frame. But what
about a sentence like *The thief who took the moon moved it to Paris*?
It would be dreadful if we had to learn a new and special ten-word frame
for each particular type of ten-word string! Clearly we don't do any
such thing. Instead, we use the pronoun *who* to make the listener find
and fill a second frame. This suggests a multistage theory. In the
earliest stages of learning to speak, we simply fill the terminals of
word-string frames with nemes for words. Then, later, we learn to fill
those terminals with other filled-in language-frames. For example, we
can describe our moon sentence as based on a top-level Trans-frame for
*move* whose Actor terminal contains a second Trans-frame for *took*:

![](./illus/ch26/26-13.png){.illus}

Using frames this way simplifies the job of learning to speak by
reducing the number of different kinds of frames we have to learn. But
it makes language learning harder, too, because we have to learn to work
with several frames at once.

How do we know which terminals to fill with which words? It isn't so
hard to deal with *red, round, thin-peeled fruit,* since each such
property involves a different agency. But that won't work for *Mary
loves Jack,* since *Jack loves Mary* has the very same words, and only
their order indicates their different roles. Each child must learn how
the order of words affects which terminal each phrase should fill. As it
happens, English applies the same policy both to *Mary loves Jack* and
to our moon sentence:

Assign the Actor pronome to the phrase before the verb. Assign the
Object pronome to the phrase after the verb.

The policies for assigning phrases to pronomes vary from one language to
another. The word order for Actor and Object is less constrained in
Latin than in English, because in Latin those roles can be specified by
altering the nouns themselves. In both languages we often indicate which
words should be assigned to other pronome roles by using specific
prepositions like *for,* *by,* and *with.* In many cases, different verb
types use the same prepositions to indicate the use of different
pronomes. At first such usages may seem to be arbitrary, but they
frequently encode important systematic metaphors; in section 21.2 we saw
how *from* and *to* are used to make analogies between space and time.
How did our language- forms evolve? We have no record of their earliest
forms,

but they surely were affected at every stage by the kinds of questions
and problems that seemed important at the time. The features of
present-day languages may still contain some clues about our ancestors'
concerns.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
