<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [seeing and
believing](./som-13.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [learning a
script](./som-13.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.4* children's drawing-frames
--------------------------------

That body-head drawing seems very wrong to most adults, yet it seems to
please many children. Does it really look like a person to those
children? That seems like a simple question, but it is not — for we must
remember that a child is not a single agent and that various other
agencies inside a child's mind may not be satisfied at all. At the
moment, those other agencies are not in control and have little effect.
Yet if some creature came on the scene that really looked like that,
most children would be terrified. It does not make much sense to speak
of what a person *really* sees, because we have so many different
agencies.

![](./illus/ch13/13-9.png){.illus}

What happened in the intervening years to make the older children draw
the body separately? This could come about without even making any
change in the list of features and relations we used in the previous
section. It would need only a small change in step 2 of our drawing
procedure:

![](./illus/ch13/13-10.png){.illus}

This ensures that every feature mentioned in the list will be
represented only once in the drawing, even if two such features look
alike. Of course, this requires some ability to count each feature only
once, and never twice. How interesting that in order to make mature,
realistic drawings, the child could exploit the same kind of ability it
must acquire in order to count things properly!

To be sure, we could explain the child's progress in other ways. That
new and *more realistic* picture could come from adding a neck to the
feature list, for that would demand a separate body and head. It might
suffice simply to impose an additional constraint or relationship: that
the head be above the body. One might argue that the younger child never
had a clear concept of a separate and distinct body feature in the first
place; after all, there are many things that you can do with your arms
and legs or with your head — but your body only gets in the way.

In any case, after mastering the art of making these body-head drawings,
many children seem to progress rather slowly in the art of making
personal portraits, and these types of *childish* drawings often persist
for some years. I suspect that after children learn to make recognizable
figures, they usually move on to face the problems of representing much
more complicated scenes. As they do this, we should continue to
appreciate how well children deal with the problems they set for
themselves. They may not meet our own grown-up expectations, but they
often solve their own versions of the problems we pose.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
