<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [automatism](./som-21.5.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [generalizing with
pronomes](./som-21.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*21.6* *trans*-frame pronomes
-----------------------------

Our first Trans-frame scheme was connected to only four pronomes —
Origin, Destination, Difference, and Trajectory. These are just enough
to link together a simple chain of reasoning. But what about all the
other roles that things can play — like Actors, Recipients, Vehicles,
Goals, Obstacles, and Instruments? In order to keep track of these, we
surely need some other pronomes, too. So now we shall imagine a larger
kind of Trans-frame scheme that engages, all at once, a much larger
constellation of different pronome roles.

![](./illus/ch21/21-6.png){.illus}

Why propose this particular structure instead of some other arrangement?
Because I suspect that Trans-like structures have a special prominence
in how we think. One reason is that some sort of bridgelike scheme seems
indispensable for making those all- important connections between
structures and functions. Without that bridge trajectory, it might be
hard to connect what we learn about things to what we learn about using
them. Also, in order to use chainlike thinking skills, we need to be
able to represent what we know in ways that provide connection points
for roles like Origins, Destinations, and Differences. All these
requirements suggest the use of bridgelike frames.

One might wonder if we need to use any *standard* representations at
all. The answer is that we do, indeed, if only because of the Investment
principle. No matter what kind of representations we adopt, there's
nothing we could do with them until we also learn effective skills and
memory-scripts that work with them. And since such complex skills take
time to grow, we'd never have enough time to learn new sets of
representations for every different new idea. No powerful skills would
ever emerge without some reasonably uniform schemes for representing
knowledge.

Trans-like representation-schemes have been very useful in Artificial
Intelligence research projects. They have been useful, among other
things, for making theories of problem solving, for making clever
computer programs to simulate *expertise* in various specialties, and
for making programs that understand languagelike expressions to limited
degrees. In the next few sections we'll see how to use them for making
several different kinds of *chains of reasoning.*

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
