<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [frames for
verbs](./som-26.8.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [learning
language](./som-26.10.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.9* language and vision
--------------------------

Some language scholars seem to think that what we do in language is
unique, in the filling of frames with other frames to open up a universe
of complicated structure-forms. But consider how frequently we do
similarly complex things in understanding visual scenes. The
language-agency must be able to interrupt itself, while handling one
phrase, to work on parts of another phrase, and this involves some
complex short-term memory skills. But in vision, too, there must be
similar processes involved in breaking scenes apart and representing
them as composed of objects and relationships. The picture below
suggests how similar such processes may be. In language, the problem is
to recognize that the two words *took* and *out* both belong to the same
verb phrase, although they are separated in time. In vision, the problem
is to recognize the two regions of a tabletop as being parts of the same
object, although they are separated in space.

![](./illus/ch26/26-14.png){.illus}

Notice also that we cannot see the tops of the blocks that serve as legs
— and yet we do not have the slightest doubt about where they end.
Similarly, the ends of language phrases are frequently unmarked — yet
again we can tell where they end. In *The thief who took the moon moved
it to Paris,* the word *who* marks the beginning of a new frame, but
there is no special word to indicate the ending of that phrase. Why
don't we wrongly assign *the moon* to the Actor of the spurious phrase,
*The moon moved it to Paris?* It is because we first heard *. . . who
took the moon,* which caused *the moon* to get attached to the Object
pronome of the Trans-frame for *took* — so now it's not available to
serve as Actor in the frame for *moved.* *The thief* is still available
to play that role. I don't mean to suggest we can never assign the same
phrase to two different roles, only that good speakers choose their
forms so that this doesn't happen by accident.

Did our capacity to deal with phraselike structures evolve first in
language or in vision? Among our ancestors, vision greatly antedates
language, so if these abilities are related, our language-agencies
themselves more likely evolved from variants of genes that first evolved
in shaping the architecture of our vision-systems. Today we have no way
to verify such a conjecture, but future geneticists may become able to
trace the ancestry of many such relationships by examining the genes
that generate the corresponding brain structures.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
