<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [causes and
clauses](./som-22.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [pronouns and
references](./som-22.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*22.8* interruptions
--------------------

What enables us to tolerate an interruption and then return to our
previous thoughts? This must engage the agents that control our
short-term memories. It is important also to recognize that many
interruptions come not only from outside, but also from inside the mind.
For example, all but the simplest discourses make interruptions in the
trains of thought they start. Consider this sentence:

The thief who took the moon moved it to Paris.

We can regard this as expressing one thought that is interrupted by
another. The principal intention of the speaker is to express this
Trans-frame:

The thief moved the moon (from ?) to Paris. Actor Trans Object Origin
Destination The speaker, realizing that the listener may not know who
the thief was, interrupts the main sentence with a *relative clause* —
*who took the moon* — to further describe that Actor thief. As it
happens, this interrupting clause also has the form of a Trans-frame —
so now the language-agency must deal with two such frames at once.

Who took the moon (from ?) (to?) Actor Trans Object Origin Destination
English tends to use certain wh words, like *which* and *who,* to
interrupt a listener's language-agency and cause its short-term memories
to temporarily store away some of their present pronome assignments.
This provides the language-agency with more capacity to understand the
interrupting phrase. In the case of the moon sentence, the word *who*
instructs the listener to prepare to elaborate the description of the
Actor thief. Once this is done, the language-agency can *re-member* its
previous state in the process of understanding the main sentence. We can
often tell when to use an interruption process even though the initial
wh word is missing; however, this doesn't always work so well:

The cotton clothing is made of is grown in the south.

This sentence is confusing because the reader tends to treat the word
*cotton* in *cotton clothing* as an adjective that modifies *clothing,*
when the writer meant it as a noun. The same sentence is easier to
understand when set in a larger context:

Where do people grow the cotton that is used to make clothing? --- The
cotton clothing is made of is grown in the south.

The first sentence activates the noun sense of *cotton* and asks a
question about that subject. Now a question is really a sort of command:
it makes the reader focus attention on a certain subject. Here, it
prepares the reader to add more structure to the representation of the
cotton noun, so there is less need for an explicit interruption signal.
Still, it is very curious how rarely we bother to use any signal at all
for marking the end of an interrupting phrase. We never say a word that
means *un-who.* Evidently, we're usually ready to assume that the
interrupting phrase is complete.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
