<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the sense of
continuity](./som-25.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the frame
idea](./som-25.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*25.5* expectations
-------------------

![](./illus/ch25/25-14.png){.illus}

Imagine that you turned around and suddenly faced an absolutely
unexpected scene. You'd be as shocked as though the world had changed
before your eyes because so many of your expectations were not met. When
we look about a familiar place, we know roughly what to expect. But what
does expect mean?

Whenever we become familiar with some particular environment like an
office, home, or outdoor place, we represent it with a frame-array whose
terminals have already been filled. Then, for each direction of motion
inside that environment, our vision-systems activate the corresponding
frames of that array. We also activate the corresponding frames even
when we merely consider or imagine a certain body motion — and this
amounts to *knowing what to expect.* In general, each frame of a spatial
frame-array is controlled by some direction-neme. However, in
surroundings that are either especially familiar or whose relationships
we do not understand, we may learn to use more specific stimuli instead
of using direction-nemes to switch the frames. For example, when you
approach a familiar door, the frame for the room that you expect to find
behind that door might be activated, not by your direction of motion,
but by your recognition of that particular door. This could explain how
a person can reside in the same home for decades, yet never learn which
of its rooms share common walls.

In any case, all this is oversimplified. Many of our frame-arrays must
require more than nine direction views; they need machinery to modify
the sizes and shapes of their objects; they must be adapted to three
dimensions; and they must be able to represent what happens at
intermediate moments during motion from one view to another.
Furthermore, the control of frame selection cannot depend on a single,
simple set of direction-nemes, for we must also compensate for the
motions of our eyes, neck, body, and legs. Indeed, a major portion of
our brain-machinery is involved with such calculations and corrections,
and it takes a long time to learn to use all that machinery. The
psychologist Piaget found that it takes ten years or more for children
to refine their abilities to imagine how the same scene will appear from
different viewpoints.

This was the basis of Hogarth's complaint. The artist felt that many
painters and sculptors never learned enough about spatial
transformations. He felt that mental imagery is an acquired skill, and
he scolded artists who gave too little time to *perfecting the ideas
they have in their minds about the objects in nature.* Accordingly,
Hogarth worked out ways to train people to better predict how viewpoints
change appearances.

\[He who undertakes the acquisition of\] perfect ideas of the distances,
bearings, and oppositions of several material points and lines in even
the most irregular figures, will gradually arrive at the knack of
recalling them into his mind when the objects themselves are not before
him — and will be of infinite service to those who invent and draw from
fancy, as well as to enable those to be more correct who draw from the
life.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
