<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [seeing and
believing](./som-13.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[boundaries](./som-13.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.1* reformulation
--------------------

Imagine all the kinds of arches one can build.

![](./illus/ch13/13-1.png){.illus}

How could we capture what's common to so many things with just one
single uniframe? Impossible — if we were forced to think of them in
terms of blocks and how they're placed. Not one of the expressions we
used before applies to all of them: neither *three blocks,* nor *two
blocks standing up,* nor *the supports must not touch.* How could we
make our minds perceive all these arches as the same? One way would be
to draw this imaginary line:

![](./illus/ch13/13-2.png){.illus}

Now, suddenly, all those different arches fit one single frame — of a
single Body with two Supports. There are two different ideas here. The
first is the idea of dividing an object's description into an
*essential* portion, namely the *body,* and some auxiliary portions,
which correspond to the support. Later we'll see that this is a powerful
idea in its own right. The second idea is even more powerful and
general: after failing to find a unified description of all those
arches, we abandoned the method we were using — and adopted, instead, a
quite different style of description. In a word, we reformulated the
problem in new terms. We started by using a language that was based on
expressing the precise shapes of individual blocks. We replaced this by
another language in which we can speak of shapes and outlines that are
not confined to those of the blocks themselves.

Reformulation is clearly very powerful — but how does one do it? How do
people find new styles of description that make their problems seem
easier? Does this depend upon some mysterious kind of insight or upon
some magically creative gift — or do we simply come upon them by
accident? As I said when discussing creativity, these seem to me mere
matters of degree, since people are always making reformulations of
various sorts. Even when we contemplate those rarest and most
revolutionary new ideas that come like revelations, suddenly to shed new
light on entire fields of thought — like evolution, gravity, or
relativity — we usually see by hindsight that these were variants of
things that people knew before that time. Then we have to ask, instead,
for reasons why those reformulations were so long postponed.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
