<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Noncompromise](./som-3.2.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [Heterarchies](./som-3.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*3.3* hierarchies
-----------------

> **bu•reauc′ra•cy** *n.* the administration of government through
> departments and subdivisions managed by sets of officials following an
> inflexible routine. —Webster's Unabridged Dictionary

As an agent, Builder does no physical work but merely turns on Begin,
Add, and End. Similarly, Add just orders Find, Put, and Get to do their
jobs. Then these divide into agents like Move and Grasp. It seems that
it will never stop — this breaking-down to smaller things.

Eventually, it all must end with agents that do actual work, but there
are many steps before we get to all the little muscle-motor agents that
actually move the arms and hands and finger joints. Thus Builder is like
a high-level executive, far removed from those subordinates who actually
produce the final product.

Does this mean that Builder's administrative work is unimportant? Not at
all. Those lower-level agents need to be controlled. It's much the same
in human affairs. When any enterprise becomes too complex and large for
one person to do, we construct organizations in which certain agents are
concerned, not with the final result, but only with what some other
agents do. Designing any society, be it human or mechanical, involves
decisions like these:

Which agents choose which others to do what jobs? Who will decide which
jobs are done at all? Who decides what efforts to expend? How will
conflicts be settled?

How much of ordinary human thought has Builder' s character? The Builder
we described is not much like a human supervisor. It doesn't decide
which agents to assign to which jobs, because that has already been
arranged. It doesn't plan its future work but simply carries out fixed
steps until End says the job is done. Nor has it any repertoire of ways
to deal with unexpected accidents.

Because our little mental agents are so limited, we should not try to
extend very far the analogy between them and human supervisors and
workers. Furthermore, as we'll shortly see, the relations between mental
agents are not always strictly hierarchical. And in any case, such roles
are always relative. To Builder, Add is a subordinate, but to Find, Add
is a boss. As for yourself, it all depends on how you live. Which sorts
of thoughts concern you most — the orders you are made to take or those
you're being forced to give?

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
