<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the mind and the
world](./som-28.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [magnitude and
marketplace](./som-28.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*28.1* the myth of mental energy
--------------------------------

Why do angry people act as though some measure of aggression must be
spent and, when no proper object lies in reach, strike out and damage
harmless things? It almost seems as though our feelings can accumulate
like fluids bottled up inside. In earlier times, some scientists
identified these quantities with substances like bile and blood. No one
believes those theories now — yet still we often speak of having mental
energy and momentum or of succumbing to depletion or inertia. Do *mental
quantities* really exist within the mind? If so, how are they made and
stored, brought forth and then spent? And what are their relations to
the quantities and magnitudes we read about in technical books? The
answer is that words like *energy* and *force* are not used with much
precision in everyday psychology. They still have the connotations that
they carried several centuries ago, when they referred to commonsense
ideas about vitality. Then, *energy* referred to vigor of action and
expression, and *force* referred to the binding strength of a commitment
or to the fighting strength of an army.

Modern scientists use a concept of energy that, though narrower and more
precise, not only explains more perfectly why engines stop when they run
out of fuel, but also applies to our bodies as well: each of the cells
of which we're made, including those inside the brain, requires some
chemical energy in the form of food and oxygen. Accordingly, the body as
a whole can do only a limited amount of physical work before it needs
another meal. Now many people naively assume that our higher-level
mental processes have similar requirements and that they need some
second form of fuel — a mythical form of mental energy — to keep from
becoming bored or mentally exhausted. And yet that simply isn't true! If
each of Builder's agents has physical energy enough to do its work, then
Builder — as an agency — needs nothing more to do its work. Builder,
after all, is but a name for a certain assembly of agents. It can't
require anything its separate agents do not need.

Machines and brains require ordinary energy to do their jobs — and need
no other, mental forms of energy. Causality is quite enough to keep them
working toward their goals.

But if our higher-level processes require no extra quantities like fuels
or energies, what makes it seem to us as though they do? Why do so many
people talk about their *levels of mental or emotional energy*? Why do
tedious and boring occupations make us feel *run down*? We all
experience so many such phenomena that we cannot help thinking our minds
depend on many kinds of *mental quantities* — yet scientists apparently
have shown that no such quantities exist. How can we explain this? It is
not enough to say, simply, that these phenomena are illusions; we must
understand why the illusions appear and, if possible, determine what
functions they serve. The next few sections show how various illusions
of mental force and energy evolve as convenient ways for mental agencies
to regulate their transactions, much as many human communities have
discovered how to use money.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
