<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [sequences of
teaching-selves](./som-17.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[attachment simplifies](./som-17.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*17.2* attachment-learning
--------------------------

Suppose a child were playing in a certain way, and a stranger appeared
and began to scold and criticize. The child would become frightened and
disturbed and try to escape. But if, in the same situation, the child's
parent arrived and proceeded to scold and criticize, the result would be
different. Instead of being frightened, the child would feel guilty and
ashamed, and instead of trying to escape, the child would try to change
what it was doing, in attempts to seek reassurance and approval.

I suspect that these two scenarios engage different learning mechanisms.
In the encounter with the forbidding visitor, the child might learn *I
should not try to achieve my present goal in this kind of situation.*
But when scolded by someone to whom the child is *attached,* the child
might learn *I ought not to want to achieve that goal at all!* In the
first case, it is a matter of learning which goal to pursue in which
circumstance; in the second instance, it is more a question of what
goals one should have. If my theory is right, the presence of the
attachment-person actually switches the effect of learning over to
different sets of agents. To see the difference, let's make a small
reformulation of the concept of a difference-engine to represent three
different kinds of learning that an infant might use.

![](./illus/ch17/17-2.png){.illus}

In the case of ordinary forms of failure or success signals, the learner
modifies the methods used to reach the goal. In the case of
fear-provoking disturbances, the learner may modify the description of
the situation itself.

In the case of attachment-related failure or reward signals, the learner
modifies which goals are considered worthy of pursuit.

So far as I know, this is a new theory about attachment. It asserts that
there are particular types of learning that can proceed only in the
presence of the particular individuals to whom one has become attached.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
