<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the function of
structures](./som-12.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[accumulation strategies](./som-12.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*12.6* accumulation
-------------------

Uniframing doesn't always work. We often try to make an everyday idea
precise — but just can't find much unity. Then, we can only accumulate
collections of examples.

![](./illus/ch12/12-10.png){.illus}

It certainly is hard to find any properties that all these share. Coins
are hard and round and flat. Bills are thin and flexible. Bullion has
unusual weight, and credits aren't even physical. We recognize them all
as media of trade — but that won't help us recognize the things
themselves. The situation is the same for furniture. It's not so hard to
say what furniture is for — *things that equip a room for living in.*
But when it comes to the objects themselves, it's even hard to find a
uniframe for *chair.* Again, its function-role seems clear — *a thing
one can sit upon.* The problem is that one can sit on almost anything —
a bench, a floor, a tabletop, a horse, a stack of bricks, a rock. Even
defining Arch has problems, since many things we recognize as arches
just don't match our Block-Arch uniframe:

![](./illus/ch12/12-11.png){.illus}

All these shapes could be described as *shape with hole* or *blocks that
bridge across a gap.* But those descriptions would also admit many
things we don't want to regard as arches. The simplest way to learn,
when one can't find a uniframe, is to accumulate descriptions of
experiences.

At first it may seem simpler to accumulate examples than to find more
uniform ways to represent them. But later there's a price to pay for
this: when we try to reason about things, accumulations can be nuisances
— because then we'll be forced to find a different argument or
explanation to justify each separate example. Most likely, different
parts of our brains have evolved to use both kinds of strategies.
Accumulations need not take longer to manipulate if all the examples can
be handled at the same time, by separate agents that don't interfere
with one another But once those processes begin to need each other's
help, the whole society's efficiency will decline rapidly. Perhaps that
slowing-down itself might be the stimulus that makes us start to try to
unify — at least for processes we use frequently.

A simpler theory of when we start new uniframes would be that in the
brain, there is an architectural constraint on how many K-lines are
directly accessible to various types of agents. For example, the agents
in a certain agency might be able to accumulate no more than about seven
branches for each classification in a certain hierarchy. When more than
that accumulate, the agency would be forced either to merge some
examples into uniframes or to turn for help from somewhere else.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
