<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [censors](./som-27.3.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [jokes](./som-27.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*27.4* exceptions to logic
--------------------------

![](./illus/ch27/27-4.png){.illus}

We spend our lives at learning things, yet always find exceptions and
mistakes. Certainty seems always out of reach. This means that we have
to take some risks to keep from being paralyzed by cowardice. But to
keep from having accidents, we must accumulate two complementary types
of knowledge:

We search for *islands of consistency* within which ordinary reasoning
seems safe. We work also to find and mark the unsafe boundaries of those
domains.

In civilized communities, appointed guardians post signs to warn about
sharp turns, thin ice, and animals that bite. And so do our
philosophers, when they report to us their paradoxical discoveries —
those tales of the Liar who admits to lying and the Barber who shaves
all the people who do not shave themselves. These valuable lessons teach
us which thoughts we shouldn't think; they are the intellectual
counterparts to Freud's emotion censors. It is interesting how
frequently we find paradoxical nonsense to be funny, and when we come to
the section on jokes, we'll see why this is so. When we look closely, we
find that most jokes are concerned with taboos, injuries, and other ways
of coming to harm — and logical absurdities can also lead to harm.

We tell our children not to cross the road unless they are sure no car
is coming. But what do we mean by *sure*? No one can ever really *prove*
that no car is coming, since there is no way to rule out the possibility
that some mad scientist has found a way to make cars invisible. In
ordinary life we have to deal with *usual* instead of *true.* All we can
really ask a child to do is *look both ways before you cross.* In the
real world, it makes no sense to ask for absolute certainty.

Unfortunately there are no simple, foolproof ways to get around the
inconsistencies of common sense. Accordingly, we each must learn
specific ways to keep from various mistakes. Why can't we do that
logically? The answer is that perfect logic rarely works. One difficulty
is finding foolproof rules for reasoning. But the more serious problem
is that of finding foolproof bases for our arguments. It is virtually
impossible to state any facts about the real world that actually are
always true. We observed this when we discussed *Birds can Fly.* This
statement applies to typical birds, but not to birds imprisoned in small
cages, chained with leg irons, or under the influence of high-gravity
fields. Similarly, when you're told, *Rover is a dog,* you'll assume
that Rover has a tail, since your frame for a typical dog has a terminal
for a tail. But should you learn that Rover lacks a tail, your mind
won't self-destruct; instead, you'll change your Rover-frame — but still
expect most other dogs to keep their tails.

Exceptions are a fact of life because few *facts* are always true. Logic
fails because it tries to find exceptions to this rule.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
