<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [frame arrays](./som-25.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [frame-arrays](./som-25.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*25.1* one frame at a time?
---------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Each of the drawings below can be seen in at least two different ways.

![](./illus/ch25/25-1.png){.illus}

The drawing on the left might represent either a single candlestick or
two people facing each other. The drawing on the right looks like a cube
â€” but first it looks like a cube as seen from above and then, suddenly,
it looks like a cube as seen from below. Why does each drawing seem to
change its character from time to time? Why can't we see both forms at
once? Because, it seems, our agencies can tolerate just one
interpretation at a time.

![](./illus/ch25/25-2.png){.illus}

We must ask certain questions here. First, what enables us to see those
pictures as composed of the features we call by names like edges, lines,
corners, and areas? Our vision-systems seem virtually compelled to group
the outputs of our sensors into entities like these. Next, what enables
us to see those features as grouped together to form larger objects?
Apparently, our vision-systems again are virtually compelled to
represent each of those features, be it a corner, edge, or area, as
belonging to one and only one larger object at a time. I won't discuss
those questions in this book except to suggest a general hypothesis:

Our vision-systems are born equipped, on each of several different
levels, with some sort of *locking-in* machinery that at every moment
permits each *part,* at each level, to be assigned to one and only one
*whole* at the next level.

We should also ask, how do we recognize those objects as examples of
familiar things like faces, cubes, or candlesticks? And again we'll make
the similar hypothesis that our memory-frame machinery also uses
*locking-in* machinery that permits each *object* to be attached only to
one frame at a time. The end result is that in every region of the
picture, the frames must compete with one another to account for each
feature.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
