<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [emotion](./som-16.1.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [mental
proto-specialists](./som-16.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.2* mental growth
--------------------

In ancient times it was believed that the newborn mind started out just
like a full-grown mind, except for not yet being filled with ideas. Thus
children were seen as ignorant adults, conceived with all their future
aptitudes. Today, there are many different views. Some modern theories
see a baby's mind as starting with a single Self whose problem is to
learn to distinguish itself from the rest of the world. Others see the
infant's mind as a place containing a horde of mind-fragments, mixed
together in a disconnected and incoherent confusion in which each must
learn to interact and cooperate with the others so that they can grow
together to form a more coherent whole. Yet another image sees the
child's mind as growing through a series of layerlike construction
stages in which new levels of machinery are based and built upon the
older ones.

How do our minds form? Is every person born containing a hidden,
built-in intellect just waiting to reveal itself? Or must minds grow in
little steps from emptiness? The theories of the next few sections will
combine ingredients from both these conceptions. We'll start by
envisioning a simple brain composed of separate *proto-specialists,*
each concerned with some important requirement, goal, or instinct, like
food, drink, shelter, comfort, or defense. But there are reasons why
those systems must be merged. On one side, we need administrative
agencies to resolve conflicts between the separate specialists. On the
other side, each specialist must be able to exploit whatever knowledge
the others gain.

For a relatively simple animal, a loose-knit league of nearly separate
agencies with built-in goals might suffice for surviving in a suitable
environment. But human minds don't merely learn new ways to reach old
goals; we can also learn new kinds of goals. This enables us to live
within a broader range of possible environments, but that versatility
comes with its own dangers. If we could learn new goals without
constraint, we'd soon fall prey to accidents — both in the world and
inside our own minds. At the simplest levels, we have to be protected
against such accidents as learning not to breathe. On higher levels, we
need protection against acquiring lethal goals like learning to suppress
our other goals entirely — the way that certain saints and mystics do.
What sorts of built-in self-constraints could guide a mind toward goals
that will not cause it to destroy itself?

No possible inheritance of built-in genes can tell us what is good for
us — because, unlike all other animals, we humans make for ourselves
most of the problems we face. Accordingly, each human individual must
learn new goals from what we call the traditions and heritages of our
peers and predecessors. Consequently our genes must build some sort of
*general-purpose* machinery through which individuals can acquire and
transmit goals and values from one generation to another. How could
brain-machines transfer things like values and goals? The next few
sections suggest that this is done by exploiting the kinds of personal
relationships we call emotional, such as fear and affection, attachment
and dependency, or hate and love.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
