<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the problem of
unity](./som-29.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [likenesses and
analogies](./som-29.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*29.6* autistic children
------------------------

Isn't it curious that infants find social goals easier to accomplish
than physical goals, while adults find the social goals more difficult?
One way to explain this is to say that the presence of helpful people
simplifies the infant's social world — since because of them, simpler
actions solve harder problems. Another explanation might be that the
infant's social world is just as complicated as that of the adult,
except the presence of helpful people makes the infant's mind more
powerful — by making the agencies inside those other people's brains
available for exploitation by the agencies in the infant's brain. Both
explanations are the same, except for drawing different boundaries.

How do children start on the path toward distinguishing between
psychological and physical relationships? In the appendix I'll suggest
that our infant brains are genetically equipped with machinery for
making it easy to learn social signals. But what if that machinery
should somehow fail, so that by chance — or by neglect or accident — the
realm-divisions never form? Then all those different kinds of thoughts
would fuse together into one — and the child would face the impossible
task of formulating principles that work in all domains. A child that
tried to see the world without dividing it into realms would find no
simple rules at all that work across so large a range.

This is why each child must learn different rules for the physical and
psychological realms. But this means that the child must face not merely
two formidable problems, but three. In addition to developing two
different sets of concepts, the child must also develop agencies to
manage those concepts by keeping them apart in different agencies, as we
saw when we talked about Papert's principle.

This could explain some aspects of the disorders of the children
psychiatrists call *autistic.* These unhappy individuals do not
establish effective communication with other people, although they may
acquire some competence at dealing with physical things. No one knows
the causes of those disorders. Some might begin when certain mental
realms do not develop normally. Other kinds of problems could emerge
after those divisions form, if their separateness were compromised by
some too intense attempt to unify them. To be sure, that is what
scientists do, but unlike those whom we regard as mentally ill,
scientists also manage to maintain their ordinary views. Once a child is
deprived of the normal ways to divide those realms — no matter what the
cause of this — that hapless mind is doomed to fail.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
