<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [conflict and
compromise](./som-3.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[Noncompromise](./som-3.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*3.1* conflict
--------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Most children not only like to build, they also like to knock things
down. So let's imagine another agent called Wrecker, whose specialty is
knocking-down. Our child loves to hear the complicated noises and watch
so many things move all at once.

![](./illus/ch3/3-1.png){.illus}

Suppose Wrecker gets aroused, but there's nothing in sight to smash.
Then Wrecker will have to get some help â€” by putting Builder to work,
for example. But what if, at some later time, Wrecker considers the
tower to be high enough to smash, while Builder wants to make it taller
still? Who could settle that dispute?

The simplest policy would be to leave that decision to Wrecker, who was
responsible for activating Builder in the first place. But in a more
realistic picture of a child's mind, such choices would depend on many
other agencies. For example, let's assume that both Builder and Wrecker
were originally activated by a higher-level agent, Play-with-Blocks.
Then, a conflict might arise if Builder and Wrecker disagree about
whether the tower is high enough.

![](./illus/ch3/3-2.png){.illus}

What aroused Play-with-Blocks in the first place? Perhaps some even
higher-level agent, Play, was active first. Then, inside Play, the agent
Play-with-Blocks achieved control, in spite of two competitors,
Play-with-Dolls and Play-with-Animals. But even Play itself, their
mutual superior-in-chief, must have had to compete with other
higher-level agencies like Eat and Sleep. For, after all, a child's play
is not an isolated thing but always happens in the context of other
real-life concerns. Whatever we may choose to do, there are always other
things we'd also like to do.

In several sections of this book, I will assume that conflicts between
agents tend to migrate upward to higher levels. For example, any
prolonged conflict between Builder and Wrecker will tend to weaken their
mutual superior, Play-with-Blocks. In turn, this will reduce
Play-with-Blocks' ability to suppress its rivals, Play-with-Dolls and
Play-with-Animals. Next, if that conflict isn't settled soon, it will
weaken the agent Play at the next-higher level. Then Eat or Sleep might
seize control.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
