<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [frame-arrays](./som-25.2.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [the sense of
continuity](./som-25.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*25.3* the stationary world
---------------------------

What makes objects seem to stay in place no matter how the viewer moves?
To common sense this is no mystery: it's simply that we're seeing all
the time and keeping contact with the world. However, I suspect that if
we had to start seeing all over again from every moment to the next,
we'd scarcely be able to see at all. This is because our higher-level
agents don't *see* the outputs of the sensors in our eyes at all.
Instead, they *watch* the states of middle-level agencies that don't
change state so frequently. What keeps those *inner models* of the world
from changing all the time? This is the function of our frame-arrays: to
store what we learn about the world at terminals that stay unchanged
when we move our heads and bodies around. This explains a wonderful
pseudoparadox: objects in the world seem to change only when the
pictures they project into our eyes don't change — that is, don't change
according to our expectations. For example, when you walk past a
circular dish, your frame-arrays expect that circle to turn into an
ellipse. When that actually happens,

the shape continues to *look* circular. However, should that expected
change fail to occur, the shape will seem to change of its own accord.

How, then, do we automatically compensate for changes of view? The
system could work just as we described in section 24.8: by using the
same direction-nemes both to control our own motions and to select
frames from our frame-arrays. For example, you might use several frames
to represent an image of a cube, arranged in a network like this:

![](./illus/ch25/25-5.png){.illus}

When you activate your *move east* direction-neme in order to make your
body move in that direction, the same signal will also make this
frame-array replace the middle frame with the one to its left. This will
compensate for your change of viewpoint and determine what you *expect*
to see — and the scene will appear to remain stationary! Michael
Crichton has suggested that when you move inside such a space, you must
unconsciously be registering the distortions of the shape, the moving
walls and corners. Only you don't interpret these as changes in the room
itself, but use them as more accurate cues to orient yourself in the
space.

You can bypass this entire system by gently pushing the side of your eye
with your finger; then the world will indeed appear to move, because
your frame-arrays do not receive the corresponding direction signals!

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
