<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Title page](./index.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [Building blocks](./som-1.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

Prologue
========

> Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.
> —Albert Einstein

<div class="toc">

</div>

This book tries to explain how minds work. How can intelligence emerge
from nonintelligence? To answer that, we'll show that you can build a
mind from many little parts, each mindless by itself.

I'll call *Society of Mind* this scheme in which each mind is made of
many smaller processes. These we'll call agents. Each mental agent by
itself can only do some simple thing that needs no mind or thought at
all. Yet when we join these agents in societies — in certain very
special ways — this leads to true intelligence.

There's nothing very technical in this book. It, too, is a society — of
many small ideas. Each by itself is only common sense, yet when we join
enough of them we can explain the strangest mysteries of mind. One
trouble is that these ideas have lots of cross-connections. My
explanations rarely go in neat, straight lines from start to end. I wish
I could have lined them up so that you could climb straight to the top,
by mental stair-steps, one by one. Instead they're tied in tangled webs.

Perhaps the fault is actually mine, for failing to find a tidy base of
neatly ordered principles. But I'm inclined to lay the blame upon the
nature of the mind: much of its power seems to stem from just the messy
ways its agents cross-connect. If so, that complication can't be helped;
it's only what we must expect from evolution's countless tricks.

What can we do when things are hard to describe? We start by sketching
out the roughest shapes to serve as scaffolds for the rest; it doesn't
matter very much if some of those forms turn out partially wrong. Next,
draw details to give these skeletons more lifelike flesh. Last, in the
final filling-in, discard whichever first ideas no longer fit.

That's what we do in real life, with puzzles that seem very hard. It's
much the same for shattered pots as for the cogs of great machines.
Until you've seen some of the rest, you can't make sense of any part.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
