<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Novelists and
reductionists](./som-2.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [Holes and
parts](./som-2.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*2.3* Parts and wholes
----------------------

We're often told that certain wholes are *more than the sum of their
parts.* We hear this expressed with reverent words like *holistic* and
*gestalt,* whose academic tones suggest that they refer to clear and
definite ideas. But I suspect the actual function of such terms is to
anesthetize a sense of ignorance. We say *gestalt* when things combine
to act in ways we can't explain, *holistic* when we're caught off guard
by unexpected happenings and realize we understand less than we thought
we did. For example, consider the two sets of questions below, the first
*subjective* and the second *objective*:

What makes a drawing more than just its separate lines? How is a
personality more than a set of traits? In what way is a culture more
than a mere collection of customs? What makes a tower more than separate
blocks? Why is a chain more than its various links? How is a wall more
than a set of many bricks?

Why do the *objective* questions seem less mysterious? Because we have
good ways to answer them — in terms of how things interact. To explain
how walls and towers work, we just point out how every block is held in
place by its neighbors and by gravity. To explain why chain-links cannot
come apart, we can demonstrate how each would get in its neighbors' way.
These explanations seem almost self-evident to adults. However, they did
not seem so simple when we were children, and it took each of us several
years to learn how real-world objects interact — for example, to prevent
any two objects from ever being in the same place. We regard such
knowledge as *obvious* only because we cannot remember how hard it was
to learn.

Why does it seem so much harder to explain our reactions to drawings,
personalities, and cultural traditions? Many people assume that those
*subjective* kinds of questions are impossible to answer because they
involve our minds. But that doesn't mean they can't be answered. It only
means that we must first know more about our minds.

*Subjective* reactions are also based on how things interact. The
difference is that here we are not concerned with objects in the world
outside, but with processes inside our brains.

In other words, those questions about arts, traits, and styles of life
are actually quite technical. They ask us to explain what happens among
the agents in our minds. But this is a subject about which we have never
learned very much — and neither have our sciences. Such questions will
be answered in time. But it will just prolong the wait if we keep using
pseudo-explanation words like *holistic* and *gestalt.* True, sometimes
giving names to things can help by leading us to focus on some mystery.
It's harmful, though, when naming leads the mind to think that names
alone bring meaning close.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
