<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [development](./som-17.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [attachment-learning](./som-17.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*17.1* sequences of teaching-selves
-----------------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Up to this point we've portrayed the mind as made of scattered fragments
of machinery. But we adults rarely see ourselves that way; we have more
sense of unity. In the next few sections we'll speculate that this
coherency is acquired over many *stages of development.* Each new stage
first works under the guidance of previous stages, to acquire some
knowledge, values, and goals. Then it proceeds to change its role and
becomes a teacher to subsequent stages.

![](./illus/ch17/17-2.png){.illus}

How could an early stage teach anything to a later one when it knows
less than its student does? As every teacher knows, this is not as hard
as it might seem. For one thing, it is usually easier to recognize a
solution to a problem than to discover a solution; this is what we
called the *puzzle principle.* A teacher need not know how to solve a
problem to be able to reward a student for doing so or to help the
student search for solutions by imparting ways to sense when progress
has been made. Even better is for the teacher to impart new goals to the
student.

How could an early stage of development affect the goals of a later
stage? One simple way would be to give each later stage some access to
the goals of earlier stages; however, those early goals would then
remain infantile. How could later stages develop more advanced goals?
Shortly we'll see an astonishing answer: it is not necessary to
formulate more advanced goals at *higher levels* of organization because
they are likely to develop spontaneously, as subgoals of relatively
simple goals.

In any case, it wouldn't be safe to send the student into the world
equipped with systems that have not yet been tried and tested. A safer
strategy would be to keep each new stage suppressed — that is, incapable
of controlling the child's actual behavior — until it passes tests to
verify that it is at least as capable as its predecessor. This could
explain some of those apparently sudden *spurts* in our children's
development — for example, in episodes of rapid growth of language
skills. That apparent speed could be illusory if it were merely the end
result of longer, hidden projects carried out silently inside the mind.

Returning to our sense of Self, how could so many steps and stages lead
to any sense of unity? Why wouldn't they lead us, instead, to feel
increasingly fragmentary and dispersed? I suspect the secret is that
after each old stage's work is done, its structure still remains
available for further use. These remnants of our prior selves provide us
with a powerful resource: whenever one's present mind gets confused, it
can exploit what once was used by earlier minds. Even though we weren't
as smart then as we are now, we can be sure that every stage once had,
in its turn, some workable ways to manage things.

One's present personality cannot share many of the thoughts of all one's
older personalities — and yet it has some sense that they exist. This is
one reason why we feel that we possess an inner Self — a sort of
ever-present person-friend, inside the mind, whom we can always ask for
help.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
