<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Consciousness and
memory](./som-15.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[self-examination](./som-15.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*15.1* momentary mental state
-----------------------------

We normally assume that consciousness is knowing what happens in our
minds right at the present time. In the next few sections, I'll argue
that consciousness does not concern the present, but the past: it has to
do with how we think about the records of our recent thoughts. But how
can thinking about thoughts be possible at all?

There's something queer about describing consciousness: whatever people
mean to say, they just can't seem to make it clear. It's not like
feeling confused or ignorant. Instead, we feel we know what's going on
but can't describe it properly. How could anything seem so close, yet
always keep beyond our reach?

There is a simple sense in which thinking about a thought is not so
different from thinking about an ordinary thing. We know that certain
agencies must learn to recognize — and even name — the feel of touching
a hand or an ear. Similarly, there must be other agencies that learn to
recognize events inside the brain — for example, the activities of the
agencies that manage memories. And those, I claim, are the bases of the
awarenesses we recognize as consciousness.

There is nothing peculiar about the idea of sensing events inside the
brain. Agents are agents — and it is as easy for an agent to be wired to
detect a brain-caused brain-event, as to detect a world-caused
brain-event. Indeed, only a small minority of our agents are connected
directly to sensors in the outer world, like those that send signals
from the eye or skin; most of the agents in the brain detect events
inside the brain. But here we're especially concerned with agents that
are engaged in using and changing our most recent memories. These lie at
the roots of consciousness.

Why, for example, do we become less conscious of some things when we
become more conscious of others? Surely this is because some resource is
approaching some limitation — and I'll argue that it is our limited
capacity to keep good records of our recent thoughts. Why, for example,
do thoughts so often seem to flow in serial streams? It is because
whenever we run out of room, the records of our recent thoughts must
then displace those of our older ones. And why are we so unaware of how
we get our new ideas? Because whenever we solve hard problems, our
short-term memories become so involved with doing that that they have
neither time nor space for keeping detailed records of what they
themselves have done.

What happens when we try to think about our most recent thoughts? We
examine our recent memories. But these were already involved in what we
were *thinking* about — and any self-inspecting probe is prone to change
just what it's looking at. Then the system is likely to break down. It
is hard enough to describe something with a stable shape; it is even
harder to describe something that changes its shape before our eyes; and
it is virtually impossible to speak of the shapes of things that change
into something else each time we try to think of them. And that's what
happens when we try to think about our present thoughts — since each
such thought must change our mental state! Would any process not become
confused that alters what it's looking at? In such a fix, how could one
ever hope to be articulate?

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
