<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [one frame at a
time?](./som-25.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the stationary
world](./som-25.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*25.2* frame-arrays
-------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

When we first discussed how Builder works, we assumed that it employed a
vision-agent, See, to locate the various blocks it needs. However, we
never discussed how See itself might work. A person simply *looks and
sees* — but that's more complicated than it seems. For instance, even a
simple cube looks different from each point of view, since as you move,
the images it makes inside your eye keep changing in both shape and
size.

![](./illus/ch25/25-3.png){.illus}

How strange and dangerous moving would be if every step made everything
seem wholly new! But that's not how it seems to us. When we move to the
right, so that A becomes invisible, we remember what we learned when we
saw it, and it still seems part of what we're seeing now. How can this
be? Here is a theory of why things seem to stay the same, even when what
we see of them keeps changing as we move around.

Frame-Arrays. When we move, our vision-systems switch among a family of
different frames that all use the same terminals.

![](./illus/ch25/25-4.png){.illus}

I'll use the term *frame-arrays* for these groups of frames that share
the same terminals. When you represent a thing's details with a
frame-array, you can continue to move around yet *keep in mind* all that
you've observed from those different viewpoints, even though you've
never seen them all at once. This gives us the wonderful ability to
conceive of all of an object's different views as aspects of a single
thing.

I do not mean to suggest that every time you see a new object you build
a brand-new frame-array for it. First, you try to match what you see to
the frame-arrays in the memories you have accumulated and refined over
periods of many years. How do frame-arrays originate? I would assume
that this underlying pattern — of families of frames that all share
common terminals — is built into the architectures of major sections of
the brain. But although that pattern is *built in,* developing the
skills for using it involves each child in more than a decade of
predestined learning.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
