<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [children's
drawing-frames](./som-13.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the
frontier effect](./som-13.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.5* learning a script
------------------------

![](./illus/ch13/13-11.png){.illus}

What will our portrait-drawing child try next? Some children keep
working to improve their person pictures. But most of them go on to put
their newfound skills to work at drawing more ambitious scenes in which
two or more picture-people interact. This involves wonderful problems
about how to depict social interactions and relationships — and these
more ambitious projects lead the child away from being concerned with
making the pictures of the individual more elaborate and realistic. When
this happens, the parent may feel disappointed at what seems to be a
lack of progress. But we should try to appreciate the changing character
of our children's ambitions and recognize that their new problems may be
even more challenging.

This doesn't mean that drawing learning stops. Even as those children
cease to make their person pictures more elaborate, the speed at which
they draw them keeps increasing, and with seemingly less effort. How and
why does this happen? In everyday life, we take it for granted that
*practice makes perfect,* and that repeating and rehearsing a skill
will, somehow, automatically cause it to become faster and more
dependable. But when you come to think of it, this really is quite
curious. You might expect, instead, that the more you learned, the
slower you would get — from having more knowledge from which to choose!
How does practice speed things up?

Perhaps, when we practice skills we can already perform, we engage a
special kind of learning, in the course of which the original
performance process is replaced or *bridged-across* by new and simpler
processes. The *program* to the left below shows the many steps our
novice portrait drawer had to take in order to draw each childish
body-face. The *script* to the right shows only those steps that
actually produce the lines of the drawing; this script has only half as
many steps.

![](./illus/ch13/13-12.png){.illus}

The people we call *experts* seem to exercise their special skills with
scarcely any thought at all — as though they were simply reading
preassembled scripts. Perhaps when we *practice* to improve our skills,
we're mainly building simpler scripts that don't engage so many
agencies. This lets us do old things with much less *thought* and gives
us more time to think of other things. The less the child has to think
of where to put each arm and leg, the more time remains to represent
what that picture-person is actually doing.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
