<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the centered
self](./som-11.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[half-brains](./som-11.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.7* predestined learning
---------------------------

It would be wonderful if we could classify all behavior into two types:
*built-in* and *learned.* But there simply is no clear-cut boundary
between heredity and environment. Later, I'll describe an agency that is
sure to learn one particular thing: to recognize human beings. But if
such an agency is destined to end up with a certain particular behavior,
is it reasonable to say that it learns? Since this type of activity
appears to have no common name, we'll call it *predestined learning.*

Every child eventually learns to reach for food. To be sure, each
different child lives through a different history of *reaching-act*
experiences. Nevertheless, according to our theory of *nearness models
of space,* all those children will end up with generally similar results
because that outcome is constrained by the nearness relations of
real-world space. Why make the brain use a tedious learning process when
the final outcome seems so clear? Why not build in the answer
genetically? One reason could be that learning is more economical. It
would require an enormous store of genetic information to force each
separate nerve cell to make precisely the right connections, whereas it
would require much less information to specify the construction of a
learning machine designed to unscramble whatever irregularities result
from a less constrained design.

This is why it isn't sensible to ask, *Is the child's conception of
space acquired or inherited?* We acquire our conceptions of space by
using agencies that learn in accord with processes determined by
inheritance. These agencies proceed to learn from experience — but the
outcomes of their learning processes are virtually predestined by the
spatial geometry of our body parts. This kind of mixture of adaptation
and predestination is quite common in biology, not only in the brain's
development but in that of the rest of the body as well. How, for
example, do our genes control the shapes and sizes of our bones? They
may begin with some relatively precise specification of the types and
location of certain early cells. But that alone would not be adequate
for animals that themselves have to adapt to different conditions;
therefore those early cells must themselves be programmed to adapt to
the various chemical and mechanical influences that may later be imposed
on them. Such systems are essential for our development, since our
organs must become able to perform various tightly constrained
activities, yet also be able to adapt to changing circumstances.

Perhaps the growth of the Society-of-More is another instance of
predestined learning, for it seems to develop in every normal child
without much outside help. It seems clear that this complex agency is
not built directly by inborn genes; instead, we each discover our own
ways to represent comparisons — yet we all arrive at much the same final
outcome. Presumably, genetic hints must help with this by supplying new
layers of agents at roughly the right times and places.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
