<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [infant
emotions](./som-16.9.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[development](./som-17.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.10* adult emotions
----------------------

![](./illus/ch16/16-13.png){.illus}

> Since emotions are few and reasons are many (said the robot, Giskard),
> the behavior of a crowd can be more easily predicted than the behavior
> of one person can. —Isaac Asimov

What are emotions, anyway? Our culture sees this question as a deep and
ancient mystery. How could the idea of society of mind contribute to
what our ancestors have said? Common-sense psychology has not even
reached a consensus on which emotions exist.

  -------------- ------- ------------ ---------- ---------
  Restlessness   Fear    Gladness     Jealousy   Sorrow
  Curiosity      Hate    Enthusiasm   Ambition   Thirst
  Infatuation    Anger   Admiration   Laziness   Disgust
  Impatience     Love    Boredom      Contempt   Hunger
  Excitement     Greed   Reverence    Anxiety    Lust
  -------------- ------- ------------ ---------- ---------

If there exists anger, what constitutes rage? How does fear relate to
fright, terror, dread, dismay, and all such other awful things? How does
love relate to reverence or to attachment or infatuation? Are these just
various degrees of intensity and direction, or are they genuinely
different entities that happen to be neighbors in an uncharted universe
of affections? Are hate and love quite separate things, or, similarly,
courage and cowardice — or are these merely pairs of extremes, each just
the absence of its peer? What are emotions, anyway, and what are all the
other things we label moods, feelings, passions, needs, or
sensibilities? We find it hard to agree on the meanings of words like
these, presumably because few of them actually correspond to clearly
distinct mental processes. Instead, when we learn such words, we each
attach to them variously different and personal accumulations of
conceptions in our minds.

Infants' early emotion signs clearly signify their needs. We later learn
to use such signals in more exploitative ways. Thus you can learn to use
affection or anger as a social coin in trade for various accommodations;
for example, one can pretend to be angry or pleased, or even offer —
that is, threaten or promise — to become angry or affectionate in
certain circumstances. Our culture is ambivalent about such matters; on
one side we're taught that emotions should be natural and spontaneous;
on the other side we're told that we must learn to regulate them. We
recognize in deeds (though not in words) that feeling may be easier to
understand and modify than other parts of intellect. We censure those
who fail to learn to control their emotions but merely pity those whose
problem-solving capabilities are poor; we blame for *lack of
self-control,* but not for *weakness of intelligence.*

Our earliest emotions are built-in processes in which inborn
proto-specialists control what happens in our brains. Soon we learn to
overrule those schemes, as our surroundings teach us what we ought to
feel. Parents, teachers, friends, and finally our self-ideals impose
upon us new rules for how to use the remnants of those early states:
they teach us how and when to feel and show each kind of emotion sign.
By the time we're adults, these systems have become too complicated to
understand. By the time we've passed through all those stages of
development, our grown-up minds have been rebuilt too many times to
remember or understand much of how it felt to be an infant.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
