<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [a
party-frame](./som-26.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [sentence
and nonsense](./som-26.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.5* story-frames
-------------------

We take it for granted that anyone can understand a story. But every
kind of narrative demands some *listening skills.* Even the best
storytellers find it hard to entertain children, who are prone to
interrupt with questions that make perfect sense by themselves but drift
away from the story's theme. *Where does Mary live?* *Does she have a
dog?* To listen well, a child must acquire potent forms of self-control.

The storyteller, too, must work to fix the focus of the listener's mind.
If you were speaking about something else and suddenly, completely out
of context, remarked, *Mary was invited to Jack's party,* an unprepared
listener might wonder, *Mary who?* and look to see if you were
addressing someone else. But you can first prepare the listener by
saying, *Would you like to hear a story?* or simply, *Once upon a time .
. .* What is the function of such a phrase? It has a very specific
effect: to set the listener into a normal and familiar state of
expecting to hear a certain type of narrative — a story. In the English
tradition, stories typically begin by specifying the time — if only
vaguely, by saying *long ago.* I'm told that in Japan most stories start
with saying where as well — if only by some empty phrase like *in a
certain time and place.* The biblical book of Job begins with, *There
was a man in the land of Uz . . .*

Most stories start with just enough to set the scene. Then they
introduce some characters, with hints about their principal concerns.
Next, the storyteller gives some clues about some *main event* or
problem to be solved. From that point on, the listener has a general
idea of what comes next: there will be more development of the problem;
then it will be resolved, somehow; and then the story will end, perhaps
by giving some practical or moral advice. In any case, those magic
story-starting words arouse, in knowing listeners' minds, great hosts of
expectation-frames to help the listeners anticipate which terminals to
fill.

Beyond arousing all these specific expectations, *once upon a time*
plays one more crucial role: it says that what comes after it is
fictional or, in any case, far too remote to activate much personal
concern. Instead, it tells the listener to disregard the normal
sympathies one should feel when real persons meet the monstrous
destinies so usual in children's tales: to be turned into toads,
imprisoned in stones, or devoured by terrible dragon beasts.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
