<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [understanding
stories](./som-26.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [a
party-frame](./som-26.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.3* sentence-frames
----------------------

![](./illus/ch26/26-5.png){.illus}

We've barely started to see what minds must do to comprehend the
simplest children's tales. Let's look again at the beginning of our
party story.

Mary was invited to Jack's party.

How marvelous that sentence is! How much it says in just six words! Two
characters are introduced and quickly cast in clear-cut roles. We learn
that there will be a party soon, with Jack as the host and Mary a guest
— provided she accepts the invitation. We also learn that this setting
is established in the past.

Those six short words tell even more. We can expect the story to focus
on Mary's activities rather than Jack's — because *Mary* is the first
word that attracts our attention. But to accomplish that, the narrator
had to use a clever grammar-tactic. Normally, an English-language
sentence begins with a phrase that describes the Actor responsible for
some action, and we usually represent this with a simple Trans-frame.

JACK INVIT — ed MARY Donor action verb Recipient In this *active verb*
form of sentence-frame, the verb is sandwiched between two nouns; the
first describes a Donor and the second describes a Recipient. However,
if our storyteller actually used the active form of sentence-frame, it
would tend to mislead the listener into expecting Jack to be the central
character of the story — if only because he is mentioned first.
Fortunately, English grammar provides an alternative sentence-frame in
which the Recipient is mentioned first — and which never mentions the
Donor at all!

MARY was INVIT — ed Recipient was verb — ed.

How does the understanding listener detect this *passive verb*
sentence-frame? Some language-agent has to notice the way the verb is
sandwiched between *was* and *-ed.* As soon as this special subframe is
recognized, the language-agency will reassign the first noun, Mary, not
to the Donor terminal, but to the Recipient terminal — and thus Mary is
represented as receiving the invitation. Why don't we need to say who
the donor is? Because in this case the listener can assume it by
default. Specifically, the expression *Jack's party* evokes a
*party-invitation frame,* and in such situations it is typical for the
host — or the host's parents — to invite the party guests. By thus
arousing familiar frames, we can say a great deal in a very few words.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
