<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the realms of
thought](./som-29.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [several thoughts
at once](./som-29.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*29.1* the realms of thought
----------------------------

Our view of the body and the mind as separate entities is only one
example of our many ways to view the world as divided into different
realms. Imagine that a committee were commissioned to write down
everything about the universe in a perfectly organized book.

![](./illus/ch29/29-2.png){.illus}

Why do the gaps between the lines seem smaller than those that separate
the pages? It is because we better understand what happens in between.
We understand how walls relate to bricks because they represent closely
related *levels of organization.* Similarly, we understand the relation
between houses and walls. But it would be hard to cross the gap between
houses and bricks without having enough intermediate concepts such as
that of a wall. It simply isn't practical to think of the place where
someone lives as a network of relationships among a million boards and
bricks.

It's much the same in other realms; we need to be able to describe
things at many levels of detail. We all belong to families or companies,
and sometimes we can think of each group as *nothing but* a network of
agreements and relationships. But when we need a larger view, as when
thinking about the politics of an entire country, we cannot think
effectively without regarding entire families or companies as though
they were single objects in a different realm. The same applies to how
we think about our minds. Even if you knew all the details of each
little agent in your brain, your higher-level processes would still need
coarser summaries.

Why is it easier to understand how walls relate to bricks, or families
to individuals, than to understand how thoughts relate to things? It's
not because there's any single mystery. It is because the level gap
between walls and bricks is really much smaller than that between minds
and brain cells. Suppose we actually had that wonderful encyclopedia of
*all possible knowledge,* arranged according to the nearness of topics.
There we'd find the essays on walls quite close to those about bricks.
But the sections that cover the nature of thoughts would lie volumes
away from the ones on the nature of things.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
