<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [predestined
learning](./som-11.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [dumbbell
theories](./som-11.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.8* half-brains
------------------

Let's do one more experiment: touch one ear and then touch your nose.
They don't feel very similar. Now touch one ear and then the other.
These touches seem more similar, although they're twice as far apart.
This may be in part because they are represented in related agencies. In
fact, our brains have many pairs of agencies, arranged like mirror-
images, with huge bundles of nerves running between them.

![](./illus/ch11/11-3.png){.illus}

The two hemispheres of the brain look so alike that they were long
assumed to be identical. Then it was found that after those
cross-connections are destroyed, usually only the left brain can
recognize or speak words, and only the right brain can draw pictures.
More recently, when modern methods found other differences between those
sides, it seems to me that some psychologists went mad — and tried to
match those differences to every mentalistic two-part theory that ever
was conceived. Our culture soon became entranced by this revival of an
old idea in modern guise: that our minds are meeting grounds for pairs
of antiprinciples. On one side stands the Logical, across from
Analogical. The left-side brain is Rational; the right side is
Emotional. No wonder so many seized upon this pseudoscientific scheme:
it gave new life to nearly every dead idea of how to cleave the mental
world into two halves as nicely as a peach.

What's wrong with this is that each brain has many parts, not only two.
And though there are many differences, we also ought to ask about why
those left-right brain halves are actually so similar. What functions
might this serve? For one thing, we know that when a major brain area is
damaged in a young person, the mirror region can sometimes take over its
function. Probably even when there is no injury, an agency that has
consumed all the space available in its neighborhood can expand into the
mirror region across the way. Another theory: a pair of mirrored
agencies could be useful for making comparisons and for recognizing
differences, since if one side could make a copy of its state on the
other side then, after doing some work, it could compare those initial
and final states to see what progress had been made.

My own theory of what happens when the cross-connections between those
brain halves are destroyed is that, in early life, we start with mostly
similar agencies on either side. Later, as we grow more complex, a
combination of genetic and circumstantial effects lead one of each pair
to take control of both. Otherwise, we might become paralyzed by
conflicts, because many agents would have to serve two masters.
Eventually, the adult managers for many skills would tend to develop on
the side of the brain most concerned with language because those
agencies connect to an unusually large number of other agencies. The
less dominant side of the brain will continue to develop, but with fewer
administrative functions — and end up with more of our lower-level
skills, but with less involvement in plans and higher-level goals that
engage many agencies at once. Then if, by accident, that brain half is
abandoned to itself, it will seem more childish and less mature because
it lags so far behind in administrative growth.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
