<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [reasoning](./som-18.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [chains of reasoning](./som-18.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.1* must machines be logical?
--------------------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

What's wrong with the old arguments that lead us to believe that if
machines could ever think at all, they'd have to think with perfect
logic? We're told that by their nature, all machines must work according
to rules. We're also told that they can only do exactly what they're
told to do. Besides that, we also hear that machines can only handle
quantities and therefore cannot deal with qualities or anything like
analogies.

Most such arguments are based upon a mistake that is like confusing an
agent with an agency. When we design and build a machine, we know a good
deal about how it works. When our design is based on neat, logical
principles, we are likely to make the mistake of expecting the machine
to behave in a similarly neat and logical fashion. But that confuses
what the machine does inside itself — that is, how it *works* — with our
expectations of how it will appear to behave in the outer world. Being
able to explain in logical terms how a machine's parts work does not
automatically enable us to explain its subsequent activities in simple,
logical terms. Edgar Allan Poe once argued that a certain chess-playing
*machine* had to be fraudulent because it did not always win. If it were
really a machine, he argued, it would be perfectly logical — and
therefore could never make any mistakes! What is the fallacy in this?
Simply that there is nothing to prevent us from using logical language
to describe illogical reasoning. To a certain extent it's true that
machines can do only what they are designed to do. But this does not
preclude us, when once we know how thinking works, from designing
machines that think.

When do we actually use logic in real life? We use it to simplify and
summarize our thoughts. We use it to explain arguments to other people
and to persuade them that those arguments are right. We use it to
reformulate our own ideas. But I doubt that we often use logic actually
to solve problems or to *get* new ideas. Instead, we formulate our
arguments and conclusions in logical terms after we have constructed or
discovered them in other ways; only then do we use verbal and other
kinds of formal reasoning to *clean things up,* to separate the
essential parts from the spaghettilike tangles of thoughts and ideas in
which they first occurred.

To see why logic must come afterward, recall the idea of solving
problems by using the generate and test method. In any such process,
logic can be only a fraction of the reasoning; it can serve as a test to
keep us from coming to invalid conclusions, but it cannot tell us which
ideas to generate, or which processes and memories to use. Logic no more
explains how we think than grammar explains how we speak; both can tell
us whether our sentences are properly formed, but they cannot tell us
which sentences to make. Without an intimate connection between our
knowledge and our intentions, logic leads to madness, not intelligence.
A logical system without a goal will merely generate an endless host of
pointless truths like these:

A implies A. P or not P. A implies A or A or A. If 4 is 5, then pigs can
fly.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
