<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [structure and
function](./som-12.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[accumulation](./som-12.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*12.5* the function of structures
---------------------------------

Many things that we regard as physical are actually psychological. To
see why this is so, let's try to say what we mean by *chair.* At first
it seems enough to say:

*A chair is a thing with legs and a back and seat.*

But when we look more carefully at what we recognize as chairs, we find
that many of them do not fit this description because they don't divide
into those separate parts. When all is done, there's little we can find
in common to all chairs â€” except for their intended use.

*A chair is something you can sit upon.*

But that, too, seems inadequate: it makes it seem as though a chair were
as insubstantial as a wish. The solution is that we need to combine at
least two different kinds of descriptions. On one side, we need
structural descriptions for recognizing chairs when we see them. On the
other side we need functional descriptions in order to know what we can
do with chairs. We can capture more of what we mean by interweaving both
ideas. But it's not enough merely to propose a vague association,
because in order for it to have some use, we need more intimate details
about how those chair parts actually help a person to sit. To catch the
proper meaning, we need connections between parts of the chair structure
and the requirements of the human body that those parts are supposed to
serve. Our network needs details like these:

![](./illus/ch12/12-8.png){.illus}

Without such knowledge, we might just crawl under the chair or try to
wear it on our head. But with that knowledge we can do amazing things,
like applying the concept of a chair to see how we could sit on a box,
even though it has no legs or back!

![](./illus/ch12/12-9.png){.illus}

Uniframes that include structures like this can be powerful. For
example, such knowledge about relations between structure, comfort, and
posture could be used to understand when a box could serve as a chair:
that is, only when it is of suitable height for a person who does not
require a backrest or room to bend the knees. To be sure, such clever
reasoning requires special mental skills with which to redescribe or
*reformulate* the descriptions of both box and chair so that they
*match* despite their differences. Until we learn to make old
descriptions fit new circumstances, our old knowledge can be applied
only to the circumstances in which it was learned. And that would
scarcely ever work, since circumstances never repeat themselves
perfectly.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
