<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [chaining](./som-18.3.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [strong arguments](./som-18.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.4* logical chains
---------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

*Logic* is the word we use for certain ways to chain ideas. But I doubt
that pure deductive logic plays much of a role in ordinary thinking.
Here is one way to contrast logical reasoning and ordinary thinking.
Both build chainlike connections between ideas. The difference is that
in logic there's no middle ground; a logic link is either there or not.
Because of this, a logical argument cannot have any *weakest link.*

![](./illus/ch18/18-6.png){.illus}

Logic demands just one support for every link, a single, flawless
deduction. Common sense asks, at every step, if all of what we've found
so far is in accord with everyday experience. No sensible person ever
trusts a long, thin chain of reasoning. In real life, when we listen to
an argument, we do not merely check each separate step;

we look to see if what has been described so far seems plausible. We
look for other evidence beyond the reasons in that argument. Consider
how often we speak of reasoning in terms of structural or architectural
expressions, as though our arguments were like the towers Builder
builds:

*Your argument is based on weak evidence.* *You must support that with
more evidence.* *That argument is shaky. It will collapse.*

In this way, commonsense reasoning differs from *logical* reasoning.
When an ordinary argument seems weak, we may be able to support it with
more evidence. But there is no way for a link inside a logic chain to
use additional support; if it's not quite right, then it's absolutely
wrong. Indeed, this weakness is actually the source of logic's own
peculiar strength, because the less we base our conclusions on, the
fewer possibilities can exist for weaknesses in our arguments! This
strategy serves mathematics well — but it doesn't help us much in
dealing with uncertainties. We cannot afford to stake our lives on
chains that fall apart so easily.

I do not mean to say that there is anything wrong with logic; I only
object to the assumption that ordinary reasoning is largely based on it.
What, then, are the functions of logic? It rarely helps us get a new
idea, but it often helps us to detect the weaknesses in old ideas.
Sometimes it also helps us clarify our thoughts by refining messy
networks into simpler chains. Thus, once we find a way to solve a
certain problem, logical analysis can help us find the most essential
steps. Then it becomes easier to explain what we've discovered to other
people — and, also, we often benefit from explaining our ideas to
ourselves. This is because, more often than not, instead of explaining
what we actually did, we come up with a new formulation. Paradoxically,
the moments in which we think we're being logical and methodical can be
just the times at which we're most creative and original.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
