<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [memories of
memories](./som-15.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [many kinds of
memory](./som-15.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*15.5* the immanence illusion
-----------------------------

> Everyone will readily allow that there is a considerable difference
> between the perceptions of the mind, when a man feels the pain of
> excessive heat, or the pleasure of moderate warmth, and when he
> afterwards recalls to his memory this sensation, or anticipates it by
> his imagination. These faculties may mimic or copy the perceptions of
> the senses; but they never can entirely reach the force and vivacity
> of the original sentiment…The most lively thought is still inferior to
> the dullest sensation. —Marcel proust

We like to think of memories as though they could restore to us things
we've known in the past. But memories can't really bring things back;
they only reproduce some fragments of our former states of mind, when
various sights, sounds, touches, smells, and tastes affected us.

Then what makes some recollections seem so real? The secret is that
real-time experience is just as indirect! The closest we can come to
apprehending the world, in any case, is through the descriptions our
agents make. In fact, if we inquired instead about why real things seem
real, we would see that this depends, as well, on memories of things
we've already known.

For instance, when you see a telephone, you have a sense not only of the
aspects you can see — its color, texture, size, and shape — but also of
how it feels to hold the instrument to your ear. You also seem to know
at once what telephones are for: that you speak into here and listen
there; that when it rings you answer it; that when you want to call, you
dial it. You have a sense of what it weighs, of whether it is soft or
hard, of what its other side is like — although you haven't even touched
it yet. These apprehensions come from memories.

The Immanence Illusion: Whenever you can answer a question without a
noticeable delay, it seems as though that answer were already active in
your mind.

This is part of why we feel that what we see is *present* in the here
and now. But it isn't really true that whenever a real object appears
before our eyes, its full description is instantly available. Our sense
of momentary mental time is flawed; our vision-agencies begin arousing
memories before their own work is fully done. For example, when you see
a horse, a preliminary recognition of its general shape may lead some
vision-agents to start evoking memories about horses before the other
vision-agents have discerned its head or tail. Perceptions can evoke our
memories so quickly that we can't distinguish what we've seen from what
we've been led to recollect.

This explains some of the subjective difference between seeing and
remembering. If you first imagined a black telephone, you probably would
not find it hard to reimagine it as red. But when you see a black
telephone and then attempt to think of it as red, your vision-systems
swiftly change it back! So the experience of seeing things has a
relatively rigid character, in contrast to the experience of imagining
things. Every change that the rest of your mind tries to impose upon
your vision-agencies is resisted and usually reversed. Perhaps it is
this descriptive rigidity that we identify with *vividness* or
*objectivity.* I do not mean to suggest that this is usually an
illusion, because it often truly reflects the persistency and permanence
of actual physical objects. Sometimes, though, our sense of objectivity
can get reversed — as when an attitude or memory becomes more stable and
persistent than what it represents. For example, our attitudes toward
things we love or loathe are often much less changeable than those
things themselves — particularly in the case of other people's
personalities. In instances like these, our private memories can be more
rigid than reality.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
