<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [expression](./som-22.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [isonomes](./som-22.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*22.1* pronomes and polynemes
-----------------------------

To represent the action *Put the apple in the pail,* the Origin pronome
must be assigned to an apple-neme, and the Destination pronome to a
polyneme for pail. However, at another time, another process might need
the Origin to represent a block and the Destination to represent a tower
top. Each pronome must be assigned to different things at different
times, and only for long enough to complete the task of the moment. In
other words, a pronome is a type of short-term memory.

This suggests a simple way to embody the idea of a pronome: each pronome
is simply a *temporary K-line.* The basic difference, then, between a
pronome and a K-line is that a pronome's connections are temporary
rather than permanent. We can *assign* a pronome by temporarily
connecting it to whichever currently active agents it reaches. Then,
when we *activate* that pronome again, those same agents will be
aroused. To make the Origin pronome represent an apple, first activate
an apple-neme; this will arouse certain agents.

Next, quickly *assign* the Origin pronome. Those agents will then become
attached to that pronome and presumably remain attached until the
pronome is reassigned.

If we compare pronomes and polynemes from this point of view, we see
that they are closely related.

Polynemes are permanent K-lines. They are long-term memories. Pronomes
are temporary K-lines. They are short-term memories.

It is not yet known today how brains form long-term memories. One
hypothesis would be that we don't really have temporary K-lines at all,
but that after a pronome's K-line is used, it becomes permanent, and the
pronome machinery gets connected to another, previously unused K-line.
However this works, we know little about it except that it requires a
substantial amount of time to form a permanent memory â€” a time on the
order of half an hour. If there is any serious disturbance in that
interval, no memory will be formed. There also is some evidence that we
can form new long-term memories at rates on the order of no more than
perhaps one every few seconds, but this is very imprecise because we
have no good definition of what we mean by separate memories. In any
case, this seems to suggest that we might have several hundred such
processes going on at once.

Why does the process take so long? Perhaps because it simply takes that
long to synthesize chemicals used to make permanent connection bridges
between agents. Perhaps most of that time is consumed in searching for
an unused K-line agent, particularly for one that already has the
required potential connections. Or perhaps the required connections
could emerge from *distributed memories* like those we mentioned briefly
in section 20.9.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
