<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [using
reformulation](./som-14.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [seeing
squares](./som-14.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*14.2* means and ends
---------------------

How do we connect the things we have with the goals we want to achieve?
The answer: We have many ways! Each use or purpose may suggest some
corresponding way to split things up — and in each such view there will
seem to be some *most essential* parts. These are the ones that, in such
a view, appear to serve the goal directly; the rest will seem like
secondary parts that only support the role of the main parts. We do this
not only in the physical realm, but in many other realms as well.

![](./illus/ch14/14-3.png){.illus}

Each of these dumbbell distinctions has its own style for distinguishing
essential parts from supportive parts. And even in the world of physical
things, we can apply these different mental views in different ways. For
example, there are many ways to describe the act of standing on a table
in order to be able to reach higher.

  --------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Support:        Tables hold things away from the floor.
  Function:       Tables are for supporting things.
  Conclusion:     If you put something on a table, its height increases.
  Cause-Effect:   I can reach higher because I start higher.
  Means-Ends:     If I want to reach higher, I can stand on a table.
  --------------- --------------------------------------------------------

Even when we simply put something on a table, we're likely to employ
several such descriptions at the same time — perhaps in different
sections of the mind. The quality of our understanding depends upon how
well we move between those different realms. In order to translate
easily from one of them to another, we must discover systematic
cross-realm correspondences. However, finding these is rare. Usually,
the situation is like that we found for chairs and games: each
description-element in one world corresponds to a hard-to- describe
accumulation of structures in the other world. What is remarkable about
the body-support concept is how often it leads to systematic cross-realm
correspondences. For example, we can use it to translate *supported by,*
in the architectural realm, into *horizontal surface underneath* in the
geometrical realm. To be sure, this correspondence fails to represent
the possibility of supporting an object by suspending it from above. But
some exceptions are inevitable.

Our systematic cross-realm translations are the roots of fruitful
metaphors; they enable us to understand things we've never seen before.
When something seems entirely new in one of our description-worlds, it
may turn out that when translated to some other world it resembles
something we already know.

Now, before you turn to the following page, try to solve this puzzle.

![](./illus/ch14/14-5.png){.illus}

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
