<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [pronomes and
polynemes](./som-22.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[de-specializing](./som-22.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*22.2* isonomes
---------------

We introduced the concept of a polyneme to explain how an agent could
communicate with many other kinds of agencies. In order for a polyneme
to work, each of its recipients must learn its own way to react. Now
we've seen a second way, for a pronome is also an agent that can
interact with many other agencies. The difference is that a pronome has
essentially the same effect on each of its recipients — namely, to
activate or to assign a certain short-term memory-unit. I'll introduce a
new word — *isonome* — for any agent that has this sort of uniform
effect on many agencies.

An isonome has a similar, built-in effect on each of its recipients. It
thus applies the same idea to many different things at once. A polyneme
has different, learned effects on each of its

recipients. It thus connects the same thing to many different ideas.

Why should isonomes exist at all? Because our agencies have common
genetic origins, they tend also to be architecturally similar. So
they'll tend to lie in roughly parallel formations like the pages of a
book, operate in generally similar ways, and have similar memory-control
processes. Then any agent whose connections tend to run straight through
the pages of that book from cover to cover will tend to have similar
effects on all of them.

Both isonomes and polynemes are involved with memories — but polynemes
are essentially the memories themselves, while isonomes control how
memories are used. Pronomes are a particular type of isonome; there must
also be *interruption isonomes* that work similarly but manage memories
on larger scales — for example, for storing away the several pronome
memories of an entire Trans- frame all at once. (We'll see how something
like this must be done whenever we encounter a grammar word like *who*
or *which.*) Yet other types of isonomes must be involved whenever an
agent is used to control the level-band of activity in another agency
without concern for all the fine details of what happens inside that
agency. So the power of polynemes stems from how they learn to arouse
many different processes at once, while isonomes draw their power from
exploiting abilities that are already common to many agencies.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
