<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [self-control](./som-4.6.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [ideals](./som-4.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*4.7* long-range plans
----------------------

We often become involved in projects that we can't complete. It is easy
to solve small problems because we can treat them as though they were
detached from all our other goals. But it is different for projects that
span larger portions of our lives, like learning a trade, raising a
child, or writing a book. We cannot simply *decide* or *choose* to
accomplish an enterprise that makes a large demand for time, because it
will inevitably conflict with other interests and ambitions. Then we'll
be forced to ask questions like these:

What must I give up for this? What will I learn from it? Will it bring
power and influence? Will I remain interested in it? Will other people
help me with it? Will they still like me?

Perhaps the most difficult question of all is, *How will adopting this
goal change me?* Just wanting to own a large, expensive house, for
instance, can lead to elaborate thoughts like these:

*That means I'd have to save for years and not get other things I'd
like. I doubt that I could bear it. True, I could reform myself, and try
to be more thrifty and deliberate. But that's just not the sort of
person I am.*

Until such doubts are set aside, all the plans we make will be subject
to the danger that we may *change our mind.* So how can any long-range
plan succeed? The easiest path to *self-control* is doing only what one
is already disposed to do.

Many of the schemes we use for self-control are the same as those we
learn to use for influencing other people. We make ourselves behave by
exploiting our own fears and desires, offering ourselves rewards, or
threatening the loss of what we love. But when short-range tricks won't
keep us to our projects for long enough, we may need some way to make
changes that won't let us change ourselves back again. I suspect that,
in order to commit ourselves to our largest, most ambitious plans, we
learn to exploit agencies that operate on larger spans of time.

Which are our slowest-changing agencies of all? Later we'll see that
these must include the silent, hidden agencies that shape what we call
character. These are the systems that are concerned not merely with the
things we want, but with what we want ourselves to be â€” that is, the
ideals we set for ourselves.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
