<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mind over
matter](./som-28.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [minds and
machines](./som-28.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*28.5* the mind and the world
-----------------------------

We spend our lives in several realms. The first is the ordinary physical
world of *objects* that exist in space and time. Objects obey simple
laws. When any object moves or changes, we can usually account for it in
terms of other objects pushing it, or else of gravity or wind. We also
live in a social realm of persons, families, and companies; those
entities appear to be ruled by quite different kinds of causes and laws.
Whenever a person moves or changes, we look for signs of intentions,
ambitions, infatuations, promises, threats, and the like — none of which
could affect a brick. We also live in a psychological realm — inhabited
by entities we call by names like *meanings,* *ideas,* and *memories.*
These, too, appear to obey different rules.

The causes in the physical realm seem terribly different from those that
work in the social and psychological realms — so different that they
seem to belong to different worlds In some respects our bodies act
exactly like ordinary objects: they have shapes we can see and touch,
and they have locations that change when we're dropped or pushed. Yet in
other ways, our bodies act quite differently from other things, and this
appears to be because of minds. But what on earth are minds? For ages
people have wondered about the relationship between the mind and body;
some philosophers became so desperate as to suggest that only the mental
world is real and the real world is merely an illusion. (That idea just
makes the problem worse, because it can't even explain why there seems
to be a physical world.) Most thinkers have ended up with images that
portray two different kinds of worlds, one of matter and one of mind,
somehow connected by mysterious threads of spiritual causality, somewhat
like the films and tendrils formed when sticky stuff is pulled apart.
Certain modern physicists have even speculated that these connections
are somehow involved with the *uncertainty principle* in physics,
perhaps because that problem also confounds their usual conceptions of
causality. I see no merit in such ideas because as far as I'm concerned,
the so-called problem of body and mind does not hold any mystery:

Minds are simply what brains do.

Whenever we speak about a mind, we're speaking of the processes that
carry our brains from state to state. And this is what makes minds
appear to us so separate from their physical embodiments: it is because
concerns about minds are really concerns with relationships between
states — and this has virtually nothing to do with the natures of the
states themselves. This is why we can understand how a society of agents
like Builder will work without knowing the physical constitution of its
agents: what happens depends only on how each agent changes its state in
response to its previous state and those of the other agents that
connect to it. Other than that, it does not matter in the least what are
the individual agents' colors, sizes, shapes, or any other properties
that we could sense. So naturally minds seem detached from physical
existence. It doesn't matter what agents are; it only matters what they
do — and what they are connected to.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
