<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [time
blinking](./som-23.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [foreign
accents](./som-23.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*23.4* the meanings of more
---------------------------

Let's return just one time more to all the things that More can mean.
Each usage has a different sense — more powerful; more meaningful — and
each such meaning must be learned. In other words, each use of More
involves a connection with an agent for some adjective. But More must
also engage some systematic use of isonomes, since all the different
meanings share a certain common character.

When we hear the word *more,* we become disposed to make comparisons.

This suggests that More engages both an accumulation of different
meanings and also some systematic, isonomelike effect. Indeed, More
could exploit our time-blinking mechanism, which already uses isonomes
to make comparisons. To do that, More would have to activate a
memory-control process that *blinks* whichever pronomes have been
assigned to the things to be compared. Then their differences would be
computed automatically.

More needs two additional ingredients. We'd never ask, all by itself,
*Which one is more, an apple or a pear?* — because our general- purpose
comparison script would generate difference-descriptions in too many
agencies. We also need to know which kind of difference is of concern at
the moment. So we scarcely ever say *more* by itself but usually attach
some modifier — more red, say, or more expensive. Of course, if our
focus of concern is already clear from the context — for example, if it
is clear that we want to know whether apples or pears are more expensive
— then we need not express this explicitly.

Finally, it is one thing to find a difference, but another to know
whether to call it *more* or *less.* It may seem self-evident that
Taller corresponds to *more,* and Thinner corresponds to *less* — yet
that is something we once had to learn. This is the other ingredient of
More: we need another polyneme to say which sorts of differences should
be considered positive. In English we sometimes encode such preferences
as choices between pairs of adjectives like *large* and

*small,* but we do not have pairs of words for concepts such as
*triangular* or *red,* presumably because we do not think of them as
having *natural* opposites. Instead, we can use word-pairs like *more
red* and *less triangular.* We can even modify the words themselves; we
often say *redder* or *rounder* — but for some reason we never say
*triangularer.*

How does one answer a question like *Which is bigger, a large mouse or a
small elephant?* We can't compare two descriptions until we engage
enough knowledge to construct suitable representations of them. One way
to compare mouse and elephant would be to envision another entity of
intermediate size. A suitcase would be suitable for this, since it could
hold the largest mouse but not the smallest elephant. How do you find
such standards for comparison? That can take considerable time, during
which you have to search your memories for structures that can serve as
links for longer chains of comparisons. As life proceeds, each person's
concept of More grows more and more elaborate. When it comes to notions
like more similar, more interesting, or *more difficult,* there seems no
limit to the complexity of what a word like *more* can represent.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
