<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [negotiating
ambiguity](./som-20.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [locking-in
and weeding-out](./som-20.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*20.3* visual ambiguity
-----------------------

We usually think of *ambiguity* as an aspect of language — but
ambiguities are just as common in vision, too. What's that structure
shown below? It could be regarded as nine separate blocks, as an arch
supported by two other arches, or as a single, complicated, nine-block
arch!

![](./illus/ch20/20-1.png){.illus}

What process makes us able to see that superarch as composed of three
little arches rather than of nine separate blocks? How, for that matter,
do we recognize those as blocks in the first place, instead of seeing
only lines and corners? These *ambiguities* are normally resolved so
quickly and quietly that our higher-level agencies have no sense of
conflict at all. To be sure, we sometimes have the sense of perceiving
the same structure in several ways at once — for example, as both a
single complex arch and as three separate simpler arches. But we usually
lock in on one particular interpretation.

Sometimes no lower-level information can resolve an ambiguity — as in
the case of this example by Oliver Selfridge.

![](./illus/ch20/20-2.png){.illus}

Here, there is no difference whatever between the H and the A, yet we
see them as having distinct identities in their different contexts.
Evidently, the *simulus* produced by the visual sense is strongly
affected by the state of some language-related agency. Furthermore, just
as we can describe the same figure in different ways, we often can
describe different figures in the same way. Thus, we recognize all these
figures as similar, though no two of them are actually the same:

![](./illus/ch20/20-3.png){.illus}

If we described each of these in terms of the lengths, directions, and
locations of their lines, they would all seem very different. But we can
make them all seem much the same by describing each of them in the same
way, perhaps like this: *a triangle with two lines extended from one of
its vertices.* The point is that what we *see* does not depend only on
what reaches our eyes from the outside world. The manner in which we
interpret those stimuli depends to a large extent on what is already
taking place inside our agencies.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
