<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [intelligence](./som-7.1.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [the puzzle principle](./som-7.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*7.2* uncommon sense
--------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag. Your browser does not
support the video tag.

We've all heard jokes about how stupid present-day computers are. They
send us bills and checks for zero dollars and zero cents. They don't
mind working in endless loops, repeating the same thing a billion times.
Their total lack of common sense is another reason people think that no
machine could have a mind.

It is interesting to note that some of the earliest computer programs
excelled at what people consider to be *expert* skills. A 1956 program
solved hard problems in mathematical logic, and a 1961 program solved
college-level problems in calculus. Yet not till the 1970s could we
construct robot programs that could see and move well enough to arrange
children's building-blocks into simple towers and playhouses. Why could
we make programs do grown-up things before we could make them do
childish things? The answer may seem paradoxical: much of *expert* adult
thinking is actually simpler than what is involved when ordinary
children play! Why is it easier to program what experts do than what
children do?

What people vaguely call common sense is actually more intricate than
most of the technical expertise we admire. Neither that *expert* program
for logic nor the one for calculus embodied more than a hundred or so
*facts* — and most of them were rather similar to one another. Yet these
were enough to solve college-level problems. In contrast, think of all
the different kinds of things a child must know merely to build a house
of blocks — a process that involves knowledge of shapes and colors,
space and time, support and balance, and an ability to keep track of
what one is doing.

To be considered an *expert,* one needs a large amount of knowledge of
only a relatively few varieties. In contrast, an ordinary person's
*common sense* involves a much larger variety of different types of
knowledge — and this requires more complicated management systems.

There is a simple reason why it is easier to acquire specialized
knowledge than commonsense knowledge. Each type of knowledge needs some
form of *representation* and a body of skills adapted to using that
style of representation. Once that investment has been made, it is
relatively easy for a specialist to accumulate further knowledge,
provided the additional expertise is uniform enough to suit the same
style of representation. A lawyer, doctor, architect, or composer who
has learned to deal with a range of cases in some particular field finds
it relatively easy to acquire more knowledge of a similar character.
Think how much longer it would take a single person to learn to deal
competently with a few diseases and several kinds of law cases and a
small variety of architectural blueprints and a few orchestral scores.
The greater variety of representations would make it much harder to
acquire the *same amount* of knowledge. For each new domain, our novice
would have to learn another type of representation and new skills for
using it. It would be like learning many different languages, each with
its own grammar, lexicon, and idioms. When seen this way, what children
do seems all the more remarkable, since so many of their actions are
based upon their own inventions and discoveries.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
