<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [exploitation](./som-16.7.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [infant emotions](./som-16.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.8* stimulus vs. simulus
---------------------------

![](./illus/ch16/16-10.png){.illus}

We've just seen how one agency could exploit another one by focusing its
attention on some object in the outer world. Thus Thirst can make Get
reach for a cup — provided there's a cup in view. But what about that
fantasy about Professor Challenger, in which there was no real villain
on the scene, but just a memory? Apparently one agency can activate
another merely by imagining a stimulus! One way to do this would be for
Anger to somehow construct an artificial picture that other agencies
like See could *see.* If this were done with enough detail, the other
agents couldn't tell that the image wasn't genuine. However, to
construct the sorts of images we see on television screens, we'd have to
activate a million different sensory nerves, which would require a huge
amount of machinery. Besides, we could do more with less: A fantasy need
not reproduce the fine details of an actual scene. It need only
reproduce that scene's effect on other agencies.

Fantasies usually *depict* occurrences we've never seen. They need no
detailed, realistic images — since the higher levels of the mind don't
really *see* things anyway! Instead, they deal with summaries of signals
that come from sensory experience and are condensed at several levels
along the way. In the fantasy of Professor Challenger, there was no need
to see any of the actual features of Challenger himself; it was enough
to reproduce some sense of how his presence once affected us.

What kind of process could reproduce the effect of an imaginary
presence? Although scientists don't yet know the fine details of how our
vision-systems work, we can assume that they involve a number of levels,
perhaps like this:

First, rays of light excite sensors in our retinas. Then, other agents
detect boundaries and textures. Then, yet other agents describe regions,
shapes, and forms. Then, some memory-frames recognize familiar objects.
Next, we recognize structural relationships among those objects.
Finally, we relate these structures to functions and goals.

Accordingly, it would be possible to produce illusions by operating at
any of these levels. Most difficult of all would be to construct a
*picture-image* by arousing, from inside the brain, the million
lowest-level sensor-agents involved in real-world vision. Perhaps the
simplest way of all would be to force just the highest-level
vision-agents into whichever states would result from seeing a certain
scene: this would only require some suitable K-lines. Let's call this a
simulus — a reproduction of only the higher-level effects of a stimulus.
A simulus at the very highest levels could lead a person to recollect
virtually no details about a remembered object or event, yet be able to
apprehend and contemplate its most significant structures and
relationships while experiencing a sense of its presence. A simulus may
have many advantages over a picture-image. Not only can it work more
swiftly while using less machinery, but we can combine the parts of
several simuli to imagine things we have never seen before — and even to
imagine things that couldn't possibly exist.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
