<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[gerrymandering](./som-9.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[enjoying discomfort](./som-9.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*9.3* learning from failure
---------------------------

So far, we've talked mostly of learning from success. But consider that
when you succeed, you must already have had the necessary means within
your grasp. If so, then making changes in your mind might only make
things worse! As people often say, *You shouldn't argue with success.*
For whenever you try to *improve* an already working procedure, you risk
damaging whichever other skills depend on that same machinery.

Accordingly, it may be more important that we learn from how we fail.
What should you do if some well-established method — call it *M* — has
failed to reach a certain goal? One policy would be to alter M, so it
won't make the same mistake again. But even that might be dangerous
because it might cause M to fail in other ways. Besides, we might not
know how to change M to remove the error. A safer way to deal with this
would be to modify M by adding special memory devices called *censors*
and *suppressors* (we'll discuss this in detail later), which remember
particular circumstances in which M fails and later proceed to suppress
M when similar conditions recur. Such censors would not tell you what to
do, only what you shouldn't do; still, they prevent your wasting time by
repeating old mistakes.

Learning has at least two sides. Some parts of our minds learn from
success — by remembering when methods work. But other portions of our
minds learn mainly when we make mistakes, by remembering the
circumstances in which various methods failed to work. Later we'll see
how this can teach not only what we shouldn't do, but also what we
shouldn't think! When that happens, it can permeate our minds with
prohibitions and taboos of which we're entirely unaware. Thus, learning
from success tends to aim and focus how we think, while learning from
failure also leads to more productive thoughts, but in a less directed
way.

We would not need to deal with exceptions and censors if we lived in a
universe of simple, general rules with no exceptions, as in the lovely
mathematical worlds of arithmetic, geometry, and logic. But perfect
logic rarely works in the real worlds of people, thoughts, and things.

This is because it is no accident that there are no exceptions to the
rules in those mathematical worlds: there, we start with the rules and
imagine only objects that obey them. But we can't so willfully make up
the rules for objects that already exist, so our only course is to begin
with imperfect guesses — collections of rough and ready rules — and then
proceed to find out where they're wrong.

Naturally, we tend to prefer learning from success rather than from
failure. However, I suspect that confining ourselves to *positive*
learning experiences alone leads to relatively small improvements in
what we can already do. Probably, there is no way to avoid at least a
certain degree of discomfort when we make substantial changes in how we
think.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
