<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [knowing
ourselves](./som-30.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the myth of
the third alternative](./som-30.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*30.6* freedom of will
----------------------

We each believe that we possess an Ego, Self, or Final Center of
Control, from which we choose what we shall do at every fork in the road
of time. To be sure, we sometimes have the sense of being dragged along
despite ourselves, by internal processes which, though they come from
within our minds, nevertheless seem to work against our wishes. But on
the whole we still feel that we can choose what we shall do. Whence
comes this sense of being in control? According to the modern scientific
view, there is simply no room at all for *freedom of the human will.*
Everything that happens in our universe is either completely determined
by what's already happened in the past or else depends, in part, on
random chance. Everything, including that which happens in our brains,
depends on these and only on these:

A set of fixed, deterministic laws. A purely random set of accidents.

There is no room on either side for any third alternative. Whatever
actions we may *choose,* they cannot make the slightest change in what
might otherwise have been — because those rigid, natural laws already
caused the states of mind that caused us to decide that way. And if that
choice was in part made by chance — it still leaves nothing for us to
decide.

Every action we perform stems from a host of processes inside our minds.
We sometimes understand a few of them, but most lie far beyond our ken.
But none of us enjoys the thought that what we do depends on processes
we do not know; we prefer to attribute our choices to volition, will, or
self-control. We like to give names to what we do not know, and instead
of wondering how we work, we simply talk of being *free.* Perhaps it
would be more honest to say, *My decision was determined by internal
forces I do not understand.* But no one likes to feel controlled by
something else.

Why don't we like to feel compelled? Because we're largely made of
systems designed to learn to achieve their goals. But in order to
achieve any long-range goals, effective difference-engines must also
learn to resist whatever other processes attempt to make them change
those goals. In childhood, everyone learns to recognize, dislike, and
resist various forms of aggression and compulsion. Naturally we're
horrified to hear about agents that hide in our minds and influence what
we decide.

In any case, both alternatives are unacceptable to self-respecting
minds. No one wants to submit to laws that come to us like the whims of
tyrants who are too remote for any possible appeal. And it's equally
tormenting to feel that we're a toy to mindless chance, caprice, or
probability — for though these leave our fate unfixed, we'd still not
play the slightest part in choosing what shall come to be. So, though
it's futile to resist, we continue to regard both Cause and Chance as
intrusions on our freedom of choice. There remains only one thing to do:
we add another region to our model of our mind. We imagine a third
alternative, one easier to tolerate; we imagine a thing called *freedom
of will,* which lies beyond both kinds of constraint.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
