<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [fringes](./som-8.7.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [knowledge-trees](./som-8.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.8* societies of memories
---------------------------

Yesterday, you watched Jack fly his kite. How do you remember that
today? One answer would be, *Remembering it is much like seeing it
again.* But yesterday, when you recognized that kite, you didn't really
see it as something wholly new. The fact that you recognized it as a
*kite* yesterday means that you already saw that kite in terms of even
older memories.

This suggests two ways to make new memories of what you saw a moment
ago. One scheme is shown to the left below: you simply connect a new
K-line to all the agents that were recently active in your mind. The
other way to make that memory is shown in the diagram to the right
below: instead of attaching the new K-line to that whole multitude of
separate agents, connect it only to whichever of your older K-lines were
active recently. This will lead to a similar result since those K-lines
were involved in arousing many of the agents that were active recently.
This second scheme has two advantages: it is more economical, and it
leads to forming memories as organized societies.

![](./illus/ch8/8-7.png){.illus}

Consider that when you realized Jack was flying a kite, this must have
involved the use of K-lines — for *Jack* and *Fly* and *Kite* — that had
been formed at earlier times and were aroused by the sight of Jack
flying his kite. When those three K-lines were activated, each of them
in turn activated hundreds or thousands of other agents. (Your state of
mind, when seeing that scene, resulted from combinations both of agents
aroused directly by your senses and of agents aroused indirectly by your
recognitions.) Now, our left-hand memory-scheme would need an enormous
number of connections to link all those agents to the new K-line. But
our right-hand scheme would obtain much the same effect by attaching the
new K-line to only three old K-lines! Yet when you reactivate that
K-line at some later date, it will, in turn, arouse the same K-lines for
Jack, Fly, Kite, and whichever other recognitions were involved. As a
result, you will reexperience many of the same recognitions as before.
To that extent, you will feel and act as though you were back in the
same situation again.

To be sure, these two types of memories would not produce exactly the
same results. Our trick of connecting new K-lines to old ones will not
recapture so many of the scene's precise, perceptual details.

Instead, the kinds of mental states that this *hierarchical* type of
memory produces will be based more on stereotypes and default
assumptions than on actual perceptions. Specifically, you will tend to
remember only what you recognized at the time. So something is lost —
but there's a gain in exchange. These *K-line memory-trees* lose certain
kinds of details, but they retain more traces of the origins of our
ideas. These memory-trees might not serve quite so well if the original
circumstances were exactly repeated. But that never happens, anyway —
and the structured memories will be much more easily adapted to new
situations.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
