<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the
society-of-more](./som-10.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the
concept of concept](./som-10.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*10.6* about piaget's experiments
---------------------------------

Although Piaget's experiments about conservation of quantity have been
confirmed as thoroughly as any in psychology, we can appreciate why many
people are skeptical when they first hear of these discoveries. They
contradict the traditional assumption that children are much like
adults, except more ignorant. How strange it is that in all the
centuries of history, these phenomena went unnoticed until Piaget — as
though no one had ever watched a child carefully! But it has always been
that way with science. Why did it take so long for our thinkers to
discover such simple ideas as Isaac Newton's laws of motion or Darwin's
idea of natural selection? Here are some frequent challenges.

Parent: Couldn't it be that younger children use words in ways that do
not mean the same things to adults? Perhaps they simply take *Which is
more?* to mean *Which is higher?* or *Which is longer?*

Careful experiments show that this can't be entirely a matter of words.
We can offer the same choices, wordlessly, yet most younger children
will still reach out for taller, thinner jars of orange juice or
stretched-out rows of candy eggs.

Critic: What happens when Appearance and History conflict? Won't that
paralyze your whole Society-of-More?

It would indeed — unless More has yet other levels and alternatives. And
adults have other kinds of explanations — like *magic,* *evaporation,*
or *theft.* But indeed, stage magicians find that making things
disappear does not entertain the youngest children; presumably they are
too used to encountering the unexplainable. What happens when More
cannot decide what to do? That depends upon the states of other agencies
— including those involved in dealing with frustration, restlessness,
and boredom.

Psychologist: We've heard of recent evidence that, despite what Piaget
said, very young children do have concepts of

quantity; many of them can even count those eggs. Doesn't that refute
some of Piaget's discoveries? Not necessarily. Consider that no one
disputes the outcomes of those jar and cup experiments. What is the
significance, then, of evidence that the young children do possess
methods that could give correct answers — and yet they do not use those
abilities? As far as I can see, such evidence would only further support
the need for explanations like those of Papert and Piaget.

Biologist: Your theory might explain how some children could acquire
those concepts about quantities — but it doesn't explain why all
children end up with such similar abilities! Could we be born with
built-in genes that make brains do this automatically?

This is a profound question. It is hard — but not impossible — to
imagine how genes could directly influence the higher-level ideas and
conceptions that we eventually learn. We'll discuss this in the appendix
at the end of this book.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
