<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [learning from
failure](./som-9.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [papert's
principle](./som-10.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*9.4* enjoying discomfort
-------------------------

Why do children enjoy the rides in amusement parks, knowing that they
will be scared, even sick? Why do explorers endure suffering and pain —
knowing that their very purpose will disperse once they arrive? And what
makes ordinary people work for years at jobs they hate, so that someday
they will be able to — some seem to have forgotten what?

There is more to motivation than immediate reward. When we succeed at
anything, a lot goes on inside the mind. For example, we may be filled
with feelings of accomplishment and pride, and feel impelled to show
others what we've done and how. However, it is the fate of more
ambitious intellects that the sweetness of success will swiftly fade as
other problems come to mind. That's good because most problems do not
stand alone but are only smaller parts of larger problems. Usually,
after we solve a problem, our agencies return to some other,
higher-level cause for discontent, only to lose themselves again in
other subproblems. Nothing would get done if we succumbed to
satisfaction.

But what if a situation gets completely out of our control — and offers
no conceivable escape from suffering? Then all we can do is try to
construct some inner plan for tolerating it. One trick is to try to
change our momentary goal — as when we say, *It's getting there that's
all the fun.* Another way is looking forward to some benefit to future
Self: *I certainly shall learn from this.* When that doesn't work, we
can still resort to even more unselfish schemes: *Perhaps others may
learn from my mistake.*

These kinds of complications make it impossible to invent good
definitions for ordinary words like *pleasure* and *happiness.* No small
set of terms could suffice to express the many sorts of goals and wants
that, in our minds, compete in different agencies and on different
scales of time. It is no wonder that those popular theories about reward
and punishment have never actually led to explaining higher forms of
human learning — however well they've served for training animals. For
in the early stages of acquiring any really new skill, a person must
adopt at least a partly antipleasure attitude: *Good, this is a chance
to experience awkwardness and to discover new kinds of mistakes!* It is
the same for doing mathematics, climbing freezing mountain peaks, or
playing pipe organs with one's feet: some parts of the mind find it
horrible, while other parts enjoy forcing those first parts to work for
them. We seem to have no names for processes like these, though they
must be among our most important ways to grow.

None of this is to say that we can discard the concepts of pleasure and
liking as we use them in everyday life. But we have to understand their
roles in our psychology; they represent the end effects of complex ways
to simplify.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
