<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [societies of
memories](./som-8.8.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [levels and
classifications](./som-8.10.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.9* knowledge-trees
---------------------

If each K-line can connect to other K-lines, which, in turn, connect to
others, then K-lines can form societies. But how can we make sure that
this can serve our purposes, instead of becoming a great, disordered
mess? What could guide them into representing useful hierarchies like
these?

![](./illus/ch8/8-8.png){.illus}

To keep things orderly, we'll now apply that level-band idea again.
Remember that we first invented K-lines to link older agents together;
then we invented level-bands to keep those K-lines from filling up with
too much useless, unrelated stuff. Now we have the same problem again:
when connecting new K-lines to old ones, we must keep them from
including too much inappropriate detail. So why not try the same
solution? Let's apply the level-band idea to the K-line trees
themselves!

When making a new K-line memory, do not connect it to all the K-lines
active at the time but only to those that are active within a certain
level-band.

It might be supposed that this idea would be hard to apply unless we
specify what *level* means. However, something like this will happen
automatically, simply because the new K-line societies will tend to
inherit whatever hierarchy already existed among the original agents
that become connected to those K-lines. We've actually seen two
different ideas about this. In our Kite example, we talked about a
description's *level of detail.* That is, we regarded it as more
elevated to talk about *a sheet stretched across a frame* than to
discuss the paper or the sticks themselves. In our Builder example, we
talked about goals and considered the Tower Builder agent itself to be a
level above the agents it exploits to solve its subproblems â€” agents
like Begin and Add and End.

This policy of connecting new K-lines to old ones must be used in
moderation. Otherwise, no new agents would ever be included in our
memories. Furthermore, it should not always be required to produce
simple, orderly hierarchy-trees; for example, in the case of Builder, we
found that both Move and See will often need one another's help.
Eventually, all of our knowledge-structures become entangled with
various sorts of exceptions, shortcuts, and cross-connections. No
matter: the level-band idea will still apply in general, since most of
what we know will still be mainly hierarchical because of how our
knowledge grows.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
