<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [How trans-frames
work](./som-24.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [nonverbal
reasoning](./som-24.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*24.4* default assumptions
--------------------------

When someone says, *John threw a ball,* you probably unconsciously
assume a certain set of features and qualities of the ball, like color,
size, and weight. These are your assumptions by default, the kind we
talked about when we first introduced the idea of level-bands. Your
assumptions about that ball might be derived from some ball you owned
long ago — or, possibly, your newest one. It is our theory that such
optional details are usually attached too weakly to hold against the
sharp insistence of reality, so that other stimuli will find them easy
to detach or otherwise adapt. This is why default assumptions make weak
images, and why we aren't too amazed when they turn out wrong. It is no
surprise that frames share so many properties of K-lines, since the
terminals of frames themselves will lie in level-bands near the K-lines
whose fringes represent our expectations and default assumptions.

But why use default assumptions at all, instead of simply seeing what's
really there? Because unless we make assumptions, the world would simply
make no sense. It would be as useless to perceive how things *actually
look* as it would be to watch the random dots on untuned television
screens. What really matters is being able to see what things look like.
This is why our brains need special machinery for representing what we
see in terms of distinct *objects.* The very idea of an object embodies
making many assumptions that *go without saying* — for example, that it
has substance and boundaries, that it existed before we saw it, and that
it will remain afterward — in short, that it will act like other typical
objects. Thus, though we never see every side of an object at once, we
always assume that its unseen sides exist. I suspect that the larger
part of what we know — or think we know — is represented by default
assumptions, because there is so little that we know with perfect
certainty.

We use default assumptions in personal relations, too. Why do so many
people give such credence to astrology, to classify friends by the
months of their births? Perhaps it seems a forward step, to class all
persons into just twelve types — to those who once supposed that there
were less. And how does the writer's craft evoke such lifelike
characters? It's ridiculous to think that people could be well portrayed
in so few words. Instead, our story writers use phrases that activate
great networks of assumptions that already lie in the minds of their
readers. It takes great skill to create those illusions — to activate
unknown processes in unknown readers' minds and to shape them to one's
purposes. Indeed, in doing so, a writer can make things clearer than
reality. For although words are merely catalysts for starting mental
processes, so, too, are real things: we can't sense what they really
are, only what they remind us of. As Proust went on to say:

Each reader reads only what is already inside himself. A book is only a
sort of optical instrument which the writer offers to let the reader
discover in himself what he would not have found without the aid of the
book.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
