<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [logical
chains](./som-18.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [magnitude from
multitude](./som-18.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.5* strong arguments
-----------------------

When people disagree, we often say that one side's position seems
*stronger* than the other. But what has *strength* to do with reasoning?
In logic, arguments are simply either right or wrong, since there is not
the slightest room for matters of degree. But in real life, few
arguments are ever absolutely sure, so we simply have to learn how
various forms of reasoning are likely to go wrong. Then we can use
different methods to make our chains of reasoning harder to break. One
method is to use several different arguments to prove the same point —
putting them *in parallel.* By analogy, when you park a car on a steep
hill, it isn't safe to depend on brakes alone. No brake can work unless
all its parts do — and, unhappily, all those parts form a long and
slender chain no stronger than its weakest link.

-- Driver's foot presses on brake pedal. --- Brake pedal forces piston
into master cylinder. ---- This forces brake fluid to flow from
cylinder.

-----Brake fluid flows through tubes to brakes at wheels. ------Pistons
in brake cylinders apply force to brake shoes. -------Brake shoes press
on wheel drums, stopping wheels.

An expert driver also leaves the car in gear and turns the wheels into
the curb. Then, though no one of these tricks is perfectly secure, the
combination cannot fail unless three things go wrong at once. This whole
is stronger than any of its parts.

![](./illus/ch18/18-11.png){.illus}

A chain can break with any single injury, but a parallel bundle cannot
fail unless every one of its links has been broken. Our car can't roll
away unless all three — brake, wheel, and parking gear — go wrong at
once. Parallel bundles and serial chains are only the simplest ways to
link together various parts. Here are some others.

![](./illus/ch18/18-12.png){.illus}

Each serial connection makes a structure weaker, while each parallel
connection makes it stronger.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
