<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Parts and
wholes](./som-2.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [easy things are
hard](./som-2.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*2.4* Holes and parts
---------------------

> It has been the persuasion of an immense majority of human beings that
> sensibility and thought \[as distinguished from matter\] are, in their
> own nature, less susceptible of division and decay, and that, when the
> body is resolved into its elements, the principle which animated it
> will remain perpetual and unchanged. However, it is probable that what
> we call thought is not an actual being, but no more than the relation
> between certain parts of that infinitely varied mass, of which the
> rest of the universe is composed, and which ceases to exist as soon as
> those parts change their position with respect to each other. —Percy
> Bysshe Shelley

Your browser does not support the video tag.

What is Life? One dissects a body but finds no life inside. What is
Mind? One dissects a brain but finds no mind therein. Are life and mind
so much more than the *sum of their parts* that it is useless to search
for them? To answer that, consider this parody of a conversation between
a Holist and an ordinary Citizen.

Holist: *I'll prove no box can hold a mouse. A box is made by nailing
six boards together. But it's obvious that no box can hold a mouse
unless it has some ‘mousetightness’ or ‘containment.’ Now, no single
board contains any containment, since the mouse can just walk away from
it. And if there is no containment in one board, there can't be any in
six boards. So the box can have no mousetightness at all. Theoretically,
then, the mouse can escape!*

Citizen: *Amazing. Then what does keep a mouse in a box?*

Holist: *Oh, simple. Even though it has no real mouse- tightness, a good
box can ‘simulate’ it so well that the mouse is fooled and can't figure
out how to escape.*

What, then, keeps the mouse confined? Of course, it is the way a box
prevents motion in all directions, because each board bars escape in a
certain direction. The left side keeps the mouse from going left, the
right from going right, the top keeps it from leaping out, and so on.
The secret of a box is simply in how the boards are arranged to prevent
motion in all directions!

That's what containing means. So it's silly to expect any separate board
by itself to contain any containment, even though each contributes to
the containing. It is like the cards of a straight flush in poker: only
the full hand has any value at all.

The same applies to words like life and mind. It is foolish to use these
words for describing the smallest components of living things because
these words were invented to describe how larger assemblies interact.
Like boxing-in, words like living and thinking are useful for describing
phenomena that result from certain combinations of relationships. The
reason box seems nonmysterious is that everyone understands how the
boards of a well-made box interact to prevent motion in any direction.
In fact, the word life has already lost most of its mystery — at least
for modern biologists, because they understand so many of the important
interactions among the chemicals in cells. But mind still holds its
mystery — because we still know so little about how mental agents
interact to accomplish all the things they do.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
