<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [how picture-frames
work](./som-24.8.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [frame
arrays](./som-25.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*24.9* recognizers and memorizers
---------------------------------

How do frames become activated? This amounts to asking how we recognize
familiar situations or things. There is no limit to how complicated such
a question can become, since there are no natural boundary lines between
recognizing, remembering, and all the rest of how we think. For
questions like this, with no place to start, we have to construct some
boundary lines from our own imagination.

We'll simply assume that every frame is activated by some set of
recognizers. We can regard a recognizer as a type of agent that, in a
sense, is the opposite of a K-line — since instead of arousing a certain
state of mind, it has to recognize when a certain state of mind occurs.
Accordingly, the recognizers of a frame are very much like the terminals
of a frame, except that the connections to the terminals are reversed.

![](./illus/ch24/24-6.png){.illus}

This suggests that not only frames but agencies in general might be
organized in the form of agents sandwiched between recognizers and
memorizers.

![](./illus/ch24/24-7.png){.illus}

This sketch of how our agencies are organized is oversimplified. Each
agent, be it a frame, a K-line, or whatever, must have some machinery
for learning when it should become active — and that may require more
than simply recognizing the presence of certain features. For example,
to recognize an object as a car, it isn't enough that it include some
assortment of parts like body, wheels, and license plate; the frame must
also recognize that those parts are in suitable relationships — that the
wheels be properly attached to the body, for example. Workers in the
field of Artificial Intelligence have experimented with a variety of
ways to make frame-recognizers, but the field is still in its infancy.
The recognizers of our higher-level agencies might have to include
mechanisms as complex as difference-engines in order to match their
relational descriptions to actual situations.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
