<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [levels](./som-8.6.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [societies of memories](./som-8.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.7* fringes
-------------

It's hard to recognize a thing when you're presented with too much
detail. To know that you are seeing a kite, it helps to look for paper,
sticks, and string. But if you were to use a microscope, what you'd
perceive would not be properties of kites at all, but merely features of
particular bits of paper, sticks or string. These might allow you to
identify a particular kite but not to recognize any other kite. Past a
certain level of detail, the more one sees, the less one can tell what
one is seeing! The same applies to memories; they should weaken their
attachments at lower levels of detail.

Lower Band: Beyond a certain level of detail, increasingly complete
memories of previous situations are increasingly difficult to match to
new situations.

To explain why K-lines need an upper-level fringe, let's return to that
example in which our child originally learned how to build a tower — but
now desires to build a house. Here, we could have another kind of
difficulty if we remembered too much about our previous goals!

Upper Band: Memories that arouse agents at too high a level would tend
to provide us with goals that are not appropriate to the present
situation.

To see why our K-line memories should weaken their attachments above a
certain level of detail, consider this most extreme form. Suppose some
memory were so complete that it made you relive, in every detail, some
perfect moment of your past. That would erase your present *you* — and
you'd forget what you had asked your memory to do!

Both fringing effects serve to make our memories more relevant to our
present purposes. The central level-band helps us find general
resemblances between remembered events and present circumstances. The
lower fringe supplies additional details but does not force them upon
us. We use them only *by default* when actual details are not supplied.
Similarly, the upper fringe recalls to mind some memories of previous
goals, but again, we're not forced to use them except by default, when
present circumstances do not impose more compelling goals. Seen this
way, we can think of the lower fringe as concerned with the structures
of things, and we can think of the upper fringe as involved with the
functions of things. The lower levels represent *objective* details of
reality; the upper levels represent our *subjective* concerns with goals
and intentions.

How could the fringes of the same K-line lie in two such different
realms? Because in order to think, we need intimate connections between
things and goals — between structures and their functions. What use
would thinking be at all, unless we could relate each thing's details to
our plans and intentions? Consider how often the English language
employs the selfsame words for things and for their purposes. What tools
would you use, when building your house, to saw and clamp and glue your
wood? That's obvious: you'd use a saw and a clamp and some glue! Behold
the wondrous force of those *meanings*: no sooner do we hear the noun
form of a word than our agents strain to perform the acts that
correspond to it as a verb. This phenomenon of connecting means with
ends is not confined to language — we'll see many other instances of it
in other kinds of agencies — but language may allow such linking with
the least constraint.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
