<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [autistic
children](./som-29.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[metaphors](./som-29.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*29.7* likenesses and analogies
-------------------------------

![](./illus/ch29/29-8.png){.illus}

We always try to use old memories to recollect how we solved problems in
the past. But nothing's ever twice the same, so recollections rarely
match. Then we must force our memories to fit — so we can see those
different things as similar. To do this, we can either modify a memory
or change how we represent the present scene. For example, suppose you
need a hammer but can only find a stone. One way to turn that stone to
your purposes would be to make it fit your memory of a hammer's
appearance — for example, by making your description of the stone
include an imaginary boundary that divides it into two parts, to serve
as handle and as head. Another way would be to make your hammer frame
accept the entire stone as a hammer without a handle. Either scheme will
make the memory match the description, but both will lead to conflicts
in other agencies.

How hard it will be to make such a match depends both on which agents
are now active in your mind and on the levels of their priorities — in
short, upon the context already established. It will be easy for you to
see two things as similar when you only need to change relatively weak
attachments at the conceptual fringes of familiar things. But frequently
the ease of comprehension will also depend upon how readily you can
switch from one mental realm to another.

Consider what must happen in our minds when poets speak about their
loves in romantic, floral terms. We all have learned a certain common
way to represent a woman's beauty in terms of flowers that are prone,
alas, to fade. For centuries this formula has been established in our
language and literature; however, at first it must have seemed bizarre.
We cannot possibly match our descriptions of women and flowers if we
insist on interpreting such phrases and poems *literally* — that is to
say, *illiterately* — entirely within the physical realm of the
appearance, composition, and behavior of a typical flower.

To be sure, the colors, symmetries, and smells of flowers can certainly
arouse the sorts of states we associate with things we've come to see as
beautiful. But the more essential trick is in knowing how to turn
entirely away from the physical realm and dwell instead upon the images
and fantasies that flowers evoke in other spheres — such as the sense of
a thing so sweet and innocent, so helpless and delicate, that it invites
affection, nurture, and protection. Features like these must be made to
fit the listener's private love ideal — only then can the metaphor
match.

This, Herrick's bitter verse defeats. By holding us so tightly to the
usual frames for human shapes, he steers us into fantasies of vegetables
with hands and feet.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
