<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [learning and
teaching](./som-22.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[expression](./som-22.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*22.5* inference
----------------

Linking structures together into chains is one of our most useful kinds
of reasoning. Suppose you learned that *John gave the kite to Mary* and
then *Mary gave the kite to Jack.* You could then conclude that the kite
went from John to Jack. How do we draw such conclusions? Some people
think we use *logic* for this. A simpler theory is that we do it by
fitting together Trans-frames into chains. Suppose you see two frames
like these:

All A's are B' s and All B 's are C's.

Then just combine the first Origin with the second Destination to make
this new *deduction-frame*:

All A's are C's.

To do this sort of *reasoning,* we have to use our isonomes to rearrange
our short-term memories. But this requires more than simple chaining.
For example, all older children can infer that Tweety can fly from
*Tweety is a bird* and *All birds can fly.* To do this, though, one has
to deal with a disparity: the first B is *a bird* while the second B is
*all birds.* To be able to make such chains would be virtually useless
if we could do it only when both pronome assignments were absolutely
identical. Over the years, children improve their abilities to decide
when two different structures are similar enough to justify making
chain-links. This often requires us to recall and apply other types of
knowledge at appropriate level-bands of detail.

Children take many years to learn effective ways to use their pronomes
and isonomes. The youngest ones can neither rearrange their
representations of physical scenes nor make the kinds of inference we're
discussing here. To think like adults, we must develop and learn to use
memory-controlling processes that manipulate several sets of pronome
values at the same time. Just such a process was concealed in our simple
script for *Put the apple in the pail* — which first appears to be
merely a matter of assigning *apple* to the Origin and *pail* to the
Destination. But you can't Put something until you Get it, so this must
actually involve two Trans-frame operations. The first is for moving
your hand to the apple, and the second is for moving the apple to the
pail. During the transition, your pronomes have to change their roles
since the apple's location is the Destination of the first Trans, but
then becomes the Origin of the second Trans. No matter that this seems
too obvious to state; some mental process has to switch that pronome's
role.

By learning to manipulate our isonomes, we become able to combine mental
representations into structures that resemble bridges, chains, and
towers. Our language-agencies learn to express these in the form of
compound sentences, by using conjunctive grammar words like *and,*
*because,* or *or.* But language is not the only realm in which we learn
to *conceptualize* — that is, to treat our mental processes almost as
though they were object-things. After you solve a hard problem, you may
find yourself representing the steps you took as if they were the parts
of a physical structure. Doing this can enable you to reassemble them
into other forms that achieve the same results with much more speed and
much less thought.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
