<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [verbal
expression](./som-22.10.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[comparisons](./som-23.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*22.11* creative expression
---------------------------

There is a wonderful capacity that comes along with the ability to
*express* ideas. Whatever we may want to say, we probably won't say
exactly that. But in exchange, there is a chance of saying something
else that is both good and new! After all, the *thing we want to say* —
the structure p we're trying to describe — is not always a definite,
fixed structure that our language-agents can easily read and copy. If p
exists at all, it's likely to be a rapidly changing network involving
several agencies. If so, then the language-agency may only be able to
make guesses and hypotheses about p and try to confirm or refute them by
performing experiments. Even if p were well defined in the first place,
this very process is liable to change it, so that the final version q
won't be the same as the original structure p. Sometimes we call this
process *thinking in words.*

In other words, whether or not what you *meant* to say actually existed
before you spoke, your language-agencies are likely either to
reformulate what did exist or create something new and different from
anything you had before. Whenever you try to express with words any
complicated mental state, you're forced to oversimplify — and that can
cause both loss and gain. On the losing side, no word description of a
mental state can ever be complete; some nuances are always lost. But in
exchange, when you're forced to separate the essences from accidents,
you gain the opportunity to make reformulations. For example, when stuck
on a problem, you may *say to yourself* things like *Now, let's see —
just what was I really trying to accomplish?* Then, since your
language-agency knows so little about the actual state of those other
agencies it must answer such questions by making theories about them,
and these may well leave you in a state that is simpler, clearer, and
better suited to solving your problem.

When we try to explain what we think we know, we're likely to end up
with something new. All teachers know how often we understand something
for the first time only after trying to explain it to someone else. Our
abilities to make language descriptions can engage all our other
abilities to think and to solve problems. If speaking involves thinking,
then one must ask, *How much of ordinary thought involves the use of
words?* Surely many of our most effective thinking methods scarcely
engage our language-agencies at all. Perhaps we turn to words only when
other methods fail. But then the use of language can open entirely new
worlds of thought. This is because once we can represent things in terms
of strings of words, it becomes possible to use them in a boundless
variety of ways to change and rearrange what happens in our other
agencies. Of course, we never realize we're doing this; instead we refer
to such activities by names like paraphrase or change of emphasis, as
though we weren't changing what we're trying to describe. The crucial
thing is that during the moments in which those word-strings are
detached from their *meanings,* they are no longer subject to the
constraints and limitations of other agencies, and the language-systems
can do what they want with them. Then we can transmit, from one person's
brain to another, the strings of words our grammar-tactics produce, and
every individual can gain access to the most successful formulations
that others can articulate. This is what we call culture — the
conceptual treasures our communities accumulate through history.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
