<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [a theory of
memory](./som-8.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[re-membering](./som-8.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.1* k-lines: a theory of memory
---------------------------------

We often talk of memory as though the things we know were stored away in
boxes of the mind, like objects we keep in closets in our homes. But
this raises many questions.

How is knowledge represented? How is it stored? How is it retrieved?
Then, how is it used?

Whenever we try to answer any of these, others seem to get more
complicated, because we can't distinguish clearly what we know from how
it's used. The next few sections explain a theory of memory that tries
to answer all these questions at once by sug- gesting that we keep each
thing we learn close to the agents that learn it in the first place.
That way, our knowledge becomes easy to reach and easy to use. The
theory is based on the idea of a type of agent called a
*Knowledge-line,* or *K-line* for short.

Whenever you *get a good idea,* solve a problem, or have a memorable
experience, you activate a K-line to *represent* it. A K-line is a
wirelike structure that attaches itself to whichever mental agents are
active when you solve a problem or have a good idea. When you activate
that K-line later, the agents attached to it are aroused, putting you
into a *mental state* much like the one you were in when you solved that
problem or got that idea. This should make it relatively easy for you to
solve new, similar problems!

In other words, we *memorize* what we're thinking about by making a list
of the agents involved in that activity. Making a K-line is like making
a list of the people who came to a successful party. Here is another
image of how K-lines work, suggested by Kenneth Haase, a student at the
MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory who had a great deal of influence
on this theory.

You want to repair a bicycle. Before you start, smear your hands with
red paint. Then every tool you need to use will end up with red marks on
it. When you're done, just remember that red means ‘good for fixing
bicycles.’ Next time you fix a bicycle, you can save time by taking out
all the red-marked tools in advance.

If you use different colors for different jobs, some tools will end up
marked with several colors. That is, each agent can become attached to
many different K-lines. Later, when there's a job to do, just activate
the proper K-line for that kind of job, and all the tools used in the
past for similar jobs will automatically become available.

This is the basic idea of the K-line theory. But suppose you had tried
to use a certain wrench, and it didn't fit. It wouldn't be so good to
paint that tool red. To make our K-lines work efficiently, we'd need
more clever policies. Still, the basic idea is simple: for each familiar
kind of mental job, your K-lines can refill your mind with fragments of
ideas you've used before on similar jobs. In such a moment, you become
in those respects more like an earlier version of yourself.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
