<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[direction-nemes](./som-24.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [how
picture-frames work](./som-24.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*24.7* picture-frames
---------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Whenever we see a thing so utterly new that it resembles nothing we've
ever seen before, this means that none of our prelearned frames will fit
it very well. But this rarely happens to adults. For example, we have
each accumulated enough room-frames to represent most rooms we're likely
to see, such as kitchens, bedrooms, offices, factories, and concert
halls; one of these will usually match whichever place we happen to be.
Besides, we can almost always use a less specific frame that fits most
any room at all — a frame with terminals that correspond to nothing more
than ceiling, floor, and walls. Then each of those six surfaces could be
represented, in turn, by a subframe that has terminals for several
vaguely defined regions. To be specific, let's employ our direction-neme
idea and divide each surface — for ceiling, floor, and each of the walls
— into zones that correspond to the nine regions of an
interaction-square. A typical wall might then be represented in this
fashion:

![](./illus/ch24/24-4.png){.illus}

In spite of its simplicity, we can represent quite a lot of information
with this scheme. It provides enough structure to recall later that
*there was a window toward the left, some shelves high to the right side
of the wall, and a table to the right.* If this does not seem precise
enough, the fact is that we usually don't remember things so exactly,
except when they attract special attention; normally it would be enough
to know only roughly where that television was, and we could assume by
default that it was supported by the tabletop. It takes surprisingly few
such observations to enable us to tell, later, whether much has been
changed.

Given more time, one could keep noticing more details and include them
by attaching additional subframes. This would overcome the limitations
of starting with so few terminals. For example, one might notice that
the window is closer to the shelf than to the television set, and closer
to the ceiling line than to either the shelf or the television set. And
if the outline of the desk and television set reminds you of a goatlike
animal, your representation can include that fact.

Suppose you had first assumed this to be a living room but later
recognized the table to be a kitchen table? Must you undo all the work
you've done, to activate a different kitchen-frame and start all over
again? No, because later we'll see a convenient way to switch over to
another frame — while still retaining what was learned so far. The trick
will be to make all our frames for different rooms share the same
terminals, so that when we interchange those frames, the information
stored in them remains.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
