<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [trans-frames](./som-21.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [pronomes](./som-21.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*21.1* the pronouns of the mind
-------------------------------

We often say what we want to say in fewer words than might seem
possible.

*Do you see the table over there?* *Yes.* *Do you see the red block on
it?* *Yes.* *Good. Please bring it to me.*

That first *it* saves the speaker from having to say *that table* again.
The second *it* does the same for *the red block.* Accordingly, many
people consider a pronoun like *it* to be an abbreviation or substitute
for another phrase used recently. But when we look at this more
carefully, we see that a pronoun need not refer to any phrase at all.
For instance, the word *this* in the previous sentence was not an
abbreviation for any particular phrase. Instead, it served as a signal
to you, the reader, to examine more carefully a certain partial state of
mind — in this case, a certain theory about pronouns — that I assumed
was aroused in your mind by the sentences that preceded it. In other
words, pronouns do not signify objects or words; instead, they represent
conceptions, ideas, or activities that the speaker assumes are going on
inside the listener's mind. But how can the listener tell which one of
the activities is signified when there are several possibilities?

*Do you remember the ring Jane liked?* *Yes.* *Good. Please buy it and
give it to her.*

How do we know that *her* means Jane and that *it* means the ring — and
not the other way around? We can tell that *her* is not the ring because
English grammar usually restricts the pronoun *her* to apply only to a
female person — though it could also mean an animal, a country, or a
ship. But you would know that *it* means *the ring* in any case, because
your Buy agency would not accept the thought of buying Jane, nor would
your agency for Give accept the thought of giving gifts to rings. If
someone said, *Buy Jane and give her to that ring,* both Buy and Give
would have such strong conflicts that the problem would ascend to the
listener's higher-level agencies, which would react with disbelief.

Our language often uses pronounlike words to refer to mental activities
— but we do not do this only in language: it happens in all the other
higher-level functions of our minds. Later we'll see how Find will find
a block — rather than, say, a toy giraffe — even though Builder has only
said *find.* The trick is that Find will use whichever description
happens to be available in its current context. Since it's already
working for Builder, its subagents will assume that it should find a
building-block.

Whenever we talk or think, we use pronounlike devices to exploit
whatever mental activities have already been aroused, to interlink the
thoughts already active in the mind. To do this, though, we need to have
machinery we can use as temporary *handles* for taking hold of, and
moving around, those active fragments of mental states. To emphasize the
analogy with the pronouns of our languages, I'll call such handles
*pronomes.* The next few sections speculate about how pronomes work.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
