<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [piaget's
experiments](./som-10.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[priorities](./som-10.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*10.2* reasoning about amounts
------------------------------

What do those egg and water jar experiments say about our growth from
infancy? Let's consider several explanations.

QUANTITY: Perhaps the younger children simply don't yet understand the
basic concept of quantity: that the amount of liquid remains the same.

In the next few sections I'll argue that we don not learn one single,
underlying *concept of quantity.* Instead, each person must construct a
multileveled agency, which we'll call the Society-of-More, that finds
different ways to deal with quantities.

EXTENT: The younger children seem unduly influenced by the larger extent
of space taken up by the spread-out eggs and taller water column.

That cannot be the whole story because most adults, too, judge that
there's more water in the taller jar — if they merely see the final
scene, without knowing from where the water was poured! Here are a few
other theories about the younger child's judgment:

REVERSIBILITY: The older children pay more attention to what they think
remains the same — while younger ones are more concerned with what has
changed. CONFINEMENT: An older child knows that the amount of water
stays the same, if none was ever added or removed or lost or spilled.

LOGIC: Perhaps younger children have not yet learned to apply the kinds
of reasoning that one would need to understand the concept of quantity.

Every one of these explanations has some truth in it, but none reach the
heart of the issue. It is clear that the older children know more about
such matters and can do more complex kinds of reasoning. But there is
ample evidence that most younger children also possess enough of the
required abilities. For example, we can describe the experiment without
actually doing it at all or we can perform it out of the child's sight,
behind a cardboard screen. Then, when we explain what is happening,
quite a few of the younger children will say, *Of course they'll be the
same.*

Then what is the difficulty? Evidently, the younger children possess the
ideas they need but don't know when to apply them! One might say that
they lack adequate knowledge about their knowledge, or that they have
not acquired the checks and balances required to select or override
their hordes of agents with different perceptions and priorities. It is
not enough to be able to use many kinds of reasoning;

one also must know which to use in different circumstances! Learning is
more than the mere accumulation of skills. Whatever we learn, there is
always more to learn — about how to use what was already learned.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
