<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[thought-experiments](./som-6.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[Frozen reflection](./som-6.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.4* *B*-Brains
----------------

There is one way for a mind to watch itself and still keep track of
what's happening. Divide the brain into two parts, A and B. Connect the
A-brain's inputs and outputs to the real world — so it can sense what
happens there. But don't connect the B-brain to the outer world at all;
instead, connect it so that the A-brain is the B-brain's world!

![](./illus/ch6/6-1.png){.illus}

Now A can see and act upon what happens in the outside world — while B
can *see* and influence what happens inside A. What uses could there be
for such a B? Here are some A-activities that B might learn to recognize
and influence.

A seems disordered and confused. Inhibit that activity. A appears to be
repeating itself. Make A stop. Do something else. A does something B
considers good. Make A remember this. A is occupied with too much
detail. Make A take a higher-level view A is not being specific enough.
Focus A on lower-level details.

This two-part arrangement could be a step toward having a more
*reflective* mind-society. The B-brain could do experiments with the
A-brain, just as the A-brain can experiment with the body or with the
objects and people surrounding it. And just as A can attempt to predict
and control what happens in the outer world, B can try to predict and
control what A will do. For example, the B-brain could supervise how the
A-brain learns, either by making changes in A directly or by influencing
A's own learning processes.

Even though B may have no concept of what A's activities mean in
relation to the outer world, it is still possible for B to be useful to
A.

This is because a B-brain could learn to play a role somewhat like that
of a counselor, psychologist, or management consultant, who can assess a
client's mental strategy without having to understand all the details of
that client's profession. Without having any idea of what A's goals are,
B might be able to learn to tell when A is not accomplishing them but
only going around in circles or wandering, confused because certain
A-agents are repeating the same things over and over again. Then B might
try some simple remedies, like suppressing some of those A-agents. To be
sure, this could also result in B's activities becoming nuisances to A.
For example, if A had the goal of adding up a long column of numbers, B
might start to interfere with this because, from B's point of view, A
appears to have become trapped in a repetitive loop. This could cause a
person accustomed to more variety to find it difficult to concentrate on
such a task and complain of being bored.

To the extent that the B-brain knows what is happening in A, the entire
system could be considered to be partly *self-aware.* However, if we
connect A and B to *watch* each other too closely, then anything could
happen, and the entire system might become unstable. In any case,

there is no reason to stop with only two levels; we could connect a
C-brain to watch the B-brain, and so on.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
