<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mental
proto-specialists](./som-16.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[avalanche effects](./som-16.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.4* cross-exclusion
----------------------

An ordinary single-bodied animal can only move in one direction at a
time, and this tends to constrain it to work toward only one goal at a
time. For example, when such an animal needs water urgently, its
specialist for *thirst* takes control; however, if cold is paramount,
finding warmth takes precedence. But if several urgent needs occur at
once, there must be a way to select one of them. One scheme for this
might use some sort of central marketplace, in which the urgencies of
different goals compete and the highest bidder takes control. However,
that strategy is prone to fall into a funny, fatal indecisiveness. To
see the problem, imagine that our animal is both very hungry and very
thirsty.

Suppose that our animal's hunger is, at first, just slightly more urgent
than its thirst. So it sets out on a trek toward the North Plain, where
food is usually found. When it arrives and takes

a bite of food, its thirst instantly takes precedence over its need for
food!

Now that thirst has top priority, our animal sets out on the long
journey toward South Lake. But once it arrives and takes one satisfying
sip, the balance instantly tips back to food. Our animal is doomed to
journey back and forth, getting hungrier and thirstier. Each action only
equalizes ever-growing urgencies.

This would be no problem at a dinner table, where food and drink are
both within easy reach. But under natural conditions, no animal could
survive the waste of energy, when every minor fluctuation caused a major
change in strategy. One way to manage this would be to use that
*marketplace* infrequently — but that would make our animal less capable
of dealing with emergencies. Another way is to use an arrangement called
cross-exclusion, which appears in many portions of the brain. In such a
system, each member of a group of agents is wired to send *inhibitory*
signals to all the other agents of that group. This makes them
competitors. When any agent of such a group is aroused, its signals tend
to inhibit the others. This leads to an avalanche effect — as each
competitor grows weaker, its ability to inhibit its challengers also
weakens. The result is that even if the initial difference between
competitors is small, the most active agent will quickly *lock out* all
the others.

![](./illus/ch16/16-6.png){.illus}

Cross-exclusion arrangements could provide a basis for the principle of
*noncompromise* in regions of the brain where competitive mental agents
lie close together. Cross-exclusion groups can also be used to construct
short-term memory-units. Whenever we force one agent of such a group
into activity, even for a moment, it will remain active (and the others
will remain suppressed) until the situation is changed by some other
strong external influence. Weaker external signals will have scarcely
any effect at all because of resistance from within. Why call this a
short-term memory if it can persist indefinitely? Because when it does
get changed, no trace will remain of its previous state.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
