<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the causal
now](./som-6.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [heads in the
clouds](./som-6.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.8* thinking without thinking
-------------------------------

Just as we walk without thinking, we think without thinking! We don't
know how our muscles make us walk — nor do we know much more about the
agencies that do our mental work. When you have a hard problem to solve,
you think about it for a time. Then, perhaps, the answer seems to come
all at once, and you say, *Aha, I've got it. I'll do such and such.* But
if someone were to ask how you found the solution, you could rarely say
more than things like the following:

-   I suddenly realized . . .
-   I just got this idea . . .
-   It occurred to me that . . .

If we could really sense the workings of our minds, we wouldn't act so
often in accord with motives we don't suspect. We wouldn't have such
varied and conflicting theories for psychology. And when we're asked how
people get their good ideas, we wouldn't be reduced to metaphors about
*ruminating,* and *digesting,* *conceiving* and *giving birth* to
concepts — as though our thoughts were anywhere but in the head. If we
could see inside our minds, we'd surely have more useful things to say.

Many people seem absolutely certain that no computer could ever be
sentient, conscious, self-willed, or in any other way *aware* of itself.
But what makes everyone so sure that they themselves possess those
admirable qualities? It's true that if we're sure of anything at all, it
is that *I'm aware — hence I'm aware.* Yet what do such convictions
really mean? If self-awareness means to know what's happening inside
one's mind, no realist could maintain for long that people have much
insight, in the literal sense of seeing-in. Indeed, the evidence that we
are self-aware — that is, that we have any special aptitude for finding
out what's happening inside ourselves — is very weak indeed. It is true
that certain people have a special excellence at assessing the attitudes
and motivations of other persons (and, more rarely, of themselves). But
this does not justify the belief that how we learn things about people,
including ourselves, is fundamentally different from how we learn about
other things. Most of the understandings we call *insights* are merely
variants of our other ways to *figure out* what's happening.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
