<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [motivation](./som-16.6.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [stimulus vs. simulus](./som-16.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*16.7* exploitation
-------------------

How could any specialist cooperate when it doesn't understand how the
others work? We manage to do our worldly work despite that same
predicament; we deal with people and machines without knowing how their
insides work. It's just the same inside the head; each part of the mind
exploits the rest, not knowing how the other parts work but only what
they seem to do.

Suppose Thirst knows that water can be found in cups — but does not know
how to find or reach for a cup; these are things only Find and Get can
do. Then Thirst must have some way to exploit the abilities of those
other agents. Builder, too, has a similar problem because most of its
subagents cannot communicate directly with one another. It would be easy
for Thirst or Builder simply to turn on other agents like Find and Get.
But how will those subordinates know what to find or get? Must Thirst
transmit to Find a picture of a cup? Must Builder send a picture of a
brick? The trouble is that neither Builder nor Thirst is the sort of
agent to contain the kind of knowledge required by Find — namely, the
visual appearances of things. That kind of knowledge lies inside the
memory-machinery of See. However, Thirst can achieve its drinking goal
by activating two connections: one to cause See to *hallucinate* a cup
and another connection to activate Find. Find itself can activate Get
later. This should suffice for Thirst to locate and obtain a cup — if
there is one in sight.

![](./illus/ch16/16-9.png){.illus}

This scheme could be unreliable. If See became concerned with another
object at that moment, Get would acquire the wrong object. Infants often
disappoint themselves this way. Still, this scheme has the kind of
simplicity one needs when starting to build any larger skill:

one needs a process that sometimes works before one can proceed to
improve it.

This is merely a sketch of how to build an automatic *getting machine.*
We'll return to this idea much later, when we discuss language, because
what Thirst and Builder have to do resembles what people do when using
words. When you say to another person, *Please pass the cup,* you don't
emit a picture of a cup but merely send a signal that exploits the other
person's memory.

Achieving a goal by exploiting the abilities of other agencies might
seem a shabby substitute for knowing how to do the work oneself. Yet
this is the very source of the power of societies. No higher-level
agency could ever achieve a complex goal if it had to be concerned with
every small detail of what each nerve and muscle does. Unless most of
its work were done by other agencies, no part of a society could do
anything significant.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
