<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[knowledge-trees](./som-8.9.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [layers
of societies](./som-8.11.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.10* levels and classifications
---------------------------------

Isn't it interesting how often we find ourselves using the idea of
level? We talk about a person's levels of aspiration or accomplishment.
We talk about levels of abstraction, levels of management, levels of
detail. Is there anything in common to all the level-things people talk
about? Yes: they each appear to reflect some way to organize ideas — and
each seems vaguely hierarchical. Usually, we tend to think that each of
those hierarchies illustrates some kind of order that exists in the
world. But frequently those orderings come from the mind and merely
appear to belong to the world. Indeed, if our theory of K-line trees is
correct, it would seem *natural* for us to classify things into levels
and hierarchies — even when this does not work out perfectly. The
diagram below portrays two ways to classify physical objects.

![](./illus/ch8/8-9.png){.illus}

These two hierarchies split things up in different ways. The birds and
airplanes are close together on one side, but far apart on the other
side. Which classification is correct? Silly question! It depends on
what you want to use it for. The one on the left is more useful for
biologists, and the one on the right is more useful for hunters.

How would you classify a porcelain duck, a pretty decorative toy? Is it
a kind of bird? Is it an animal? Or is it just a lifeless piece of clay?
It makes no sense to argue about it: *That's not a bird!* *Oh, yes, it
is, and it is also pottery.* Instead, we frequently use two or more
classifications at the same time. For example, a thoughtful child can
play with a porcelain duck as though it were a make-believe animal, yet
at the same time treat it carefully, in its role as a delicate object.

Whenever we develop a new skill or extend an old one, we have to
emphasize the relative importance of some aspects and features over
others. We can place these into neat levels only when we discover
systematic ways to do so. Then our classifications can resemble
level-schemes and hierarchies. But the hierarchies always end up getting
tangled and disorderly because there are also exceptions and
interactions to each classification scheme. When attempting a new task,
we never like to start anew: we try to use what has worked previously.
So we search around inside our minds for old ideas to use. Then, when
part of any hierarchy seems to work, we drag the rest along with it.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
