<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mathematics made
hard](./som-18.8.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [Words and
ideas](./som-19.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.9* robustness and recovery
------------------------------

Most machines that people build stop working when their parts break
down. Isn't it amazing that our minds can keep on functioning while
they're making changes in themselves? Indeed, they must, since minds
can't simply shut down work when *closed for renovations.* But how do we
keep functioning while vital parts are modified — or even lost? It's a
fact that our brains can keep on working well in spite of injuries in
which great multitudes of cells are killed. How could anything be so
robust? Here are some possibilities:

Duplication. It is possible to design a machine so that every one of its
functions is embodied in several duplicated agents, in different places.
Then, if any agent is disabled, one of its duplicates can be made to
*take over.* A machine based on this duplication-scheme could be
surprisingly robust. For example, suppose that every function were
duplicated in ten agents. If an accident were to destroy half the agents
of that machine, the chance that any particular function would be
entirely lost is the same as the chance that ten tossed coins would all
come up tails — that is, less than one chance in a thousand. And many
regions of the human brain do indeed have several duplicates.

Self-Repair. Many of the body's organs can regenerate — that is, they
can replace whichever parts are lost to injury or disease. However,
brain cells do not usually share this ability. Consequently, healing
cannot be the basis of much of the brain's robustness. This makes one
wonder why an organ as vital as the brain has evolved to be less able
than other organs to repair or replace its broken parts. Presumably,
this is because it simply wouldn't help to replace individual
brain-agents — unless the same healing process could also restore all
the learned connections among those agents. Since it is those networks
that embody what we've learned, merely to replace their separate parts
would not restore the functions that were lost.

Distributed Processes. It is possible to build machines in which no
function is located in any one specific place. Instead, each function is
*spread out* over a range of locations, so that each part's activity
contributes a little to each of several different functions. Then the
destruction of any small portion will not destroy any function entirely
but will only cause small impairments to many different functions.

Accumulation. I'm sure that all of the above methods are employed in our
brains. But we also have another source of robustness that offers more
advantages. Consider any learning-scheme that begins by using the method
of accumulation — in which each agent tends to accumulate a family of
subagents that can accomplish that agent's goals in several ways. Later,
if any of those subagents become impaired, their supervisor will still
be able to accomplish its job, because other of its subagents will
remain to do that job, albeit in different ways. So accumulation — the
very simplest kind of learning — provides both robustness and
versatility. Our learning- systems can build up centers of diversity in
which each agent is equipped with various alternatives. When such a
center is damaged, the effects may scarcely begin to show until the
system's reserves are nearly exhausted.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
