<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [ambiguity](./som-20.1.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [visual ambiguity](./som-20.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*20.2* negotiating ambiguity
----------------------------

Many common words are ambiguous enough that even simple sentences can be
understood in several ways.

The astronomer married the star.

It probably was a movie star — though the listener may have experienced
a moment of confusion. The trouble is that the word *star* is linked to
different polynemes for a celestial body, a theatrical celebrity, or an
object with a certain shape. The momentary confusion comes because the
word *astronomer* gives us an initial bias toward the celestial sense of
*star.* But that inhuman meaning causes conflict in our marriage-agent,
and this soon leads to another, more consistent interpretation. The
problem is harder when a sentence contains two or more ambiguous words.

John shot two bucks.

Alone, the word *shot* could refer either to shooting a gun or, in
American slang, to making a bet. By itself, the word *buck* could mean
either a dollar or a male deer. These alternatives permit at least four
conceivable interpretations. Two of them are quite implausible, because
people rarely shoot bullets at dollars or bet deer. But the other two
are possible, since, unfortunately, people do bet dollars and shoot at
deer. Without more clues, we have no way to choose between these
interpretations. Yet we wouldn't have the slightest doubt that *buck*
means dollar if the previous context gave a hint that money or gambling
was involved — rather than hunting, forestry, or outdoor life.

How do *contexts* work to clarify such ambiguities? The activity of an
outdoors polyneme would start by producing a small bias for arousing
deer rather than dollar and gun instead of bet. Then the *ring-closing*
effect would swiftly make that preference sharp. Other polynemes like
those for hunting and killing will soon be engaged and will combine to
activate the recognizers for yet other, related polynemes like those for
forest and animal. Soon this will produce a collection of mutually
supporting polynemes that establish a single, consistent interpretation.

One might fear that this would lead, instead, to an avalanche that
arouses all the agents of the mind. That would be less likely to happen
if the different possible senses of each word are made to compete, by
being assembled into cross-exclusion groups. Then, as the polynemes for
deer and gun gain strength, they will weaken and suppress the competing
nemes for money and for wagering — and that will weaken, in turn, the
other polynemes that support the alternative context of making bets. The
end effect of this will be almost instantaneous. In only a few cycles of
the meaning ring, the agents associated with deer and gun will
completely suppress their competitors.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
