<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [quantity and
quality](./som-28.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the mind and
the world](./som-28.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*28.4* mind over matter
-----------------------

It seems completely natural to us that we should feel pain when we're
injured or hunger when we're deprived of food. Such feelings seem to us
to be inherent in those predicaments. Then why doesn't a car feel pain
when its tire is punctured or feel hungry when its fuel runs low? The
answer is that pain and hunger are not inherent in being injured or
starved: such feelings must be *engineered.* These physical
circumstances do not directly produce the states of mind they arouse; on
the contrary, this depends upon intricate networks of agencies and
nerve-bundles that took millions of years to evolve. We have no
conscious sense of that machinery. When your skin is touched, it seems
as though it were your skin that feels — and not your brain — because
you're unaware of everything that happens in between.

In order for hunger to keep us fed, it must engage some agency that
gives priority to food-acquiring goals. But unless such signals came
before our fuel reserves were entirely gone, they'd arrive too late to
have any use. This is why feeling hungry or tired is not the same as
being genuinely starved or exhausted. To serve as useful *warning
signs,* feelings like pain and hunger must be engineered not simply to
indicate dangerous conditions, but to anticipate them and warn us before
too much damage is done.

But what about the feelings of depression and discouragement we get when
stuck at boring jobs or with problems we cannot solve? Such feelings
resemble those that accompany physical fatigue, but they do not signify
genuine depletions because they often easily respond to changes of
context, interest, and schedule. Nevertheless, the similarity would be
no accident, for probably those feelings arise because our higher-level
brain centers have evolved connections that exploit our ancient
fuel-exhaustion warning systems. After all, the unproductive use of time
is virtually equivalent to wasting hard- earned energy!

Now what about those incidents in which some person seems to go beyond
what we supposed were the normal bounds of endurance, strength, or
tolerance of pain? We like to believe this demonstrates that the force
of will can overrule the physical laws that govern the world. But a
person's ability to persist in circumstances we hadn't thought were
tolerable need not indicate anything supernatural. Since our feelings of
pain, depression, exhaustion, and discouragement are themselves mere
products of our minds' activities — and ones that are engineered to warn
us before we reach our ultimate limits — we need no extraordinary power
of mind over matter to overcome them. It is merely a matter of finding
ways to rearrange our priorities.

In any case, what hurts — and even what is *felt* at all — may, in the
end, be more dependent upon culture than biology. Ask anyone who runs a
marathon, or ask your favorite Amazon.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
