<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [momentary mental
time](./som-6.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [thinking without
thinking](./som-6.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*6.7* the causal now
--------------------

Our everyday ideas about the progression of mental time are wrong: they
leave no room for the fact that every agent has a different causal
history. To be sure, those different pasts are intermixed over longer
spans of time, and every agent is eventually influenced by what has
happened in the common, remote history of its society. But that's not
what one means by *now.* The problem is with the connections between the
moment-to-moment activities of largely separate agencies.

When a pin drops, you might say, *I just heard a pin drop.* But no one
says, *I hear a pin dropping.* Our speaking agencies know from
experience that the physical episode of pin dropping will be over before
you can even start to speak. But you would say, *I am in love,* rather
than *I was just in love,* because your speaking agencies know that the
agencies involved with personal attachments work at a slower pace, with
states that may persist for months or years. And, in between, when
someone asks, *What sorts of feelings have you now?* we often find our
half-formed answers wrong before they can be expressed, as other
feelings intervene. What seems only a moment to one agency may seem like
an era to another.

Our memories are only indirectly linked to physical time. We have no
absolute sense of when a memorable event *actually* happened. At best,
we can only know some temporal relations between it and certain other
events. You might be able to recall that X and Y occurred on different
days but be unable to determine which of those days came earlier. And
many memories seem not to be linked to intervals of time at all — like
knowing that four comes after three, or that *I am myself.*

The slower an agency operates — that is, the longer the intervals
between each change of state — the more external signals can arrive
inside those intervals. Does this mean that the outside world will
appear to move faster to a slow agency than to a faster agency? Does
life seem swift to tortoises, but tedious to hummingbirds?

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
