<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [intellectual
trauma](./som-17.10.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[reasoning](./som-18.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*17.11* intellectual ideals
---------------------------

How do we deal with thoughts that lead to frightening results? What
should one think about the *nearly* paradox that threatens to imply that
all things, large and small, might be the same size? One strategy would
be to constrain that kind of reasoning, by learning never to chain
together more than two or three such nearness links. Then,

perhaps, one might proceed to generalize that strategy, in fear that
it's unsafe to chain together too many instances of any form of
inference.

But what could the phrase *too many* mean? There is no universal answer.
Just as in the case of More, we have to learn this separately in each
important realm of thought: what are the limitations of each type and
style of reasoning? Human thought is not based on any single and uniform
kind of *logic,* but upon myriad processes, scripts, stereotypes,
critics and censors, analogies and metaphors. Some are acquired through
the operation of our genes, others are learned from our environments,
and yet others we construct for ourselves. But even inside the mind, no
one really learns alone, since every step employs many things we've
learned before, from language, family, and friends — as well as from our
former Selves. Without each stage to teach the next, no one could
construct anything as complex as a mind.

There is another way our intellectual growth is not so different from
our emotional development: we can make intellectual attachments, too,
and want to think the way certain other persons do. These intellectual
ideals may stem from parents, teachers, and friends; from persons one
has never met, such as writers; even from legendary heroes who did not
exist. I suspect we depend as much on images of how we ought to think as
we do on images of how we ought to feel. Some of our most persistent
memories are about certain teachers, but not about what was taught. (At
the moment I'm writing this, I feel as though my hero Warren McCulloch
were watching disapprovingly; he would not have liked these neo-Freudian
ideas.) No matter how emotionally neutral an enterprise may seem,
there's no such thing as being *purely rational.* One must always
approach each situation with some personal style and disposition. Even
scientists have to make stylistic choices:

Is there enough evidence yet, or should I seek more? Is it time to make
a uniframe — or should I accumulate more examples? Can I rely on older
theories here, or should I trust my latest guess? Should I try to be
Reductionist or Novelist?

At every step, the choices we make depend on what we have become.

Our sciences, arts, and moral skills do not originate from detached
ideals of truth, beauty, or virtue but stem partly from our endeavors to
placate or please the images established in earlier years. Our adult
dispositions thus evolve from impulses so infantile that we would surely
censure them, if they were not by now transformed, disguised, or — as
Freud said — *sublimated.*

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
