<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [recognizing
thoughts](./som-19.9.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [context and
ambiguity](./som-20.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*19.10* closing the ring
------------------------

Now let's redraw the diagram for the language-agency, but fill in more
details from the last few sections.

![](./illus/ch19/19-10.png){.illus}

Something amazing happens when you go around a loop like this! Suppose
you were to imagine three properties of an apple — for example, its
substance, taste, and thin-peeled structure. Then, even if there were no
apple on the scene — and even if you had not yet thought of the word
*apple* — the recognition-agent on the left will be aroused enough to
excite your *apple* polyneme. (This is because I used the number three
for the required sum in the apple polyneme's recognizer instead of
demanding that all five properties be present. ) That agent can then
arouse the K-lines in other agencies, like those for color and shape —
and thus evoke your memories of other apple properties! In other words,
if you start with enough clues to arouse one of your apple-nemes, it
will automatically arouse memories of the other properties and qualities
of apples and create a more complete impression, *simulus,* or
hallucination of the experience of seeing, feeling, and even of eating
an apple. This way, a simple loop machine can reconstruct a larger whole
from clues about only certain of its parts!

Many thinkers have assumed that such abilities lie beyond the reach of
all machines. Yet here we see that retrieving the whole from a few of
its parts requires no magic leap past logic and necessity, but only
simple societies of agents that *recognize* when certain requirements
are met. If something is red and round and has the right size and shape
for an apple — and nothing else seems wrong — then one will probably
think *apple.*

This method for arousing complete recollections from incomplete clues —
we could call it *reminding* — is powerful but imperfect. Our speaker
might have had in mind not an apple, but some other round, red, fruit,
such as a tomato or a pomegranate. Any such process leads only to
guesses — and frequently these will be wrong. Nonetheless, to think
effectively, we often have to turn aside from certainty — to take some
chance of being wrong. Our memory systems are powerful because they're
not constrained to be perfect!

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
