<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [individual
identities](./som-28.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the realms
of thought](./som-29.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*28.8* overlapping minds
------------------------

Consider the popular idea that a person is capable of two kinds of
thinking at once — a *right brain* kind and a *left brain* kind — as
though there were two different individuals inside each human brain.
This raises some odd questions, since there are many other ways to draw
imaginary boundaries through brains.

![](./illus/ch28/28-3.png){.illus}

If you agree that each person has both a left-brain mind and right-brain
mind, then you must also agree that each person also has a front-brain
mind and a back-brain mind! Can a single large mind contain so many
smaller ones, with overlapping boundaries? It makes sense to think of
part of a structure as being a *thing* in its own right only when the
relationships among parts of that structure have some significant type
of coherency. Before you'd say that a certain arbitrary section of brain
contains a mind, you'd want to have some evidence that what happens
inside that boundary is something you would consider to be a mind.

The less another entity resembles you, the less it means for you to say
that it, like you, must have a mind. Do our very smallest agencies have
minds? No, because it would make no more sense to say this than to say
that two trees form a forest or that two bricks form a wall. But there
are indeed some agencies inside our brains that do have humanlike
abilities to solve, by themselves, some types of problems that we regard
as hard. For example, your agencies for locomotion, vision, and language
may contain within their boundaries some processes that are quite as
intricate as those *you* use for your own conscious thought. Possibly,
some of those processes are actually more *conscious* than you are
yourself, in the sense that they maintain and use even more complete
records of their own internal activities. Yet what happens in those
agencies is so sealed off that you have no direct experience of how
*you* distinguish a cat from a dog, retrace *your* last few steps, or
listen and talk without knowing how *you* do it.

All this suggests that it can make sense to think there exists, inside
your brain, a society of different minds. Like members of a family, the
different minds can work together to help each other, each still having
its own mental experiences that the others never know about. Several
such agencies could have many agents in common, yet still have no more
sense of each other's interior activities than do people whose
apartments share opposite sides of the same walls. Like tenants in a
rooming house, the processes that share your brain need not share one
another's mental lives.

If each of us contains several such mini-minds, could any special
exercise help put them all *in closer touch*? Certainly there are ways
to become selectively aware of processes that are usually not conscious
at all. But becoming aware of everything that happens in brains would
leave no room for thought. And the reports of those who claim to have
developed such skills seem singularly uninformative. If anything, they
demonstrate that it's even harder than we think to penetrate those
unresisting barriers.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
