<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [means and
ends](./som-14.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[brainstorming](./som-14.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*14.3* seeing squares
---------------------

Most people find the nine-dot problem hard to solve because they assume
that the dots form a square that bounds the working space. Indeed, the
problem is insoluble unless the drawing can extend outside that area.
Thus the problem is easier if one does not perceive those dots as
forming a square. We often self-impose assumptions that make our
problems more difficult, and we can escape from this only by
reformulating those problems in ways that give us more room.

![](./illus/ch14/14-6.png){.illus}

Really, there was never any square in the first place â€” that is, in the
literal sense of *a rectangle with equal sides.* What makes us see so
many different sorts of things as though they were squares?

![](./illus/ch14/14-7.png){.illus}

Some of these squares have no corners, others have no edges, and some of
them have neither corners nor edges! What makes us see them all as
squares? Psychologists have long wondered how we recognize such
similarities but often forgot to ask how we recognize the very simplest
forms of squares in the first place. Which comes first in recognition,
specific features or global shapes? It must depend upon one's state of
mind. The way we perceive the world, from one moment to another, depends
only in part on what comes from our eyes: the rest of what we think we
see comes from inside our brain; we respond not only to visual features,
but also to our remembrances of things we've seen before and to our
expectations of what we ought to see.

It is tempting to assume that our visual processes work only in one
direction, bringing information from the world into the mind:

![](./illus/ch14/14-8.png){.illus}

But this does not explain how what we see is influenced by what we
expect to see. Human vision must somehow combine the information that
comes from the outer world with the structures in our memories. The
situation must be more like this:

![](./illus/ch14/14-9.png){.illus}

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
