<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [default
assumptions](./som-24.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[direction-nemes](./som-24.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*24.5* nonverbal reasoning
--------------------------

Even when you were very young, if someone had told you that most Snarks
are green — and, also, that every Boojum is a Snark — you would have
been able to conclude that most Boojums are green. What could have led
you to that conclusion? Presumably, you answer questions about the
properties of Boojums by attaching your polyneme for Snark to whichever
of your memory-units currently represents a Boojum. Accordingly, you
assume that the color property of a Boojum is green by using your usual
way of recalling the properties of things you know — activating their
polynemes to set your various agencies into the corresponding states. In
other words, we do this kind of reasoning by manipulating our memories
to replace particular things by typical things. I mention all this
because it is often assumed that adults are better than children are at
what is often called abstract or logical reasoning. This idea is unfair
both to adult and child because logical thinking is so much simpler —
and less effective — than common-sense thinking. Actually, what appears
to be a matter of *logic* is usually not logical at all and frequently
turns out to be wrong. In the case above, you would have been wrong
because Boojums are albino Snarks.

The situation is different when you happen to know more about a
particular example. For example, suppose you first had learned that
penguins cannot fly and then learned that penguins are a kind of bird.
When you discover that, should you replace all of your penguin
properties with those of your *generic* bird? Clearly not, since then
you'd lose your hard-earned penguin facts. To deal with this
effectively, children must develop complex skills, not merely to replace
one representation with another, but to compare two representations and
then move around inside them, making different changes at different
levels. These intricate skills involve the use of isonomes that control
the level-band of the activities inside our agencies.

In any case, to reason well, our memory-control agencies must learn to
*move* our memories around as though those memories were
building-blocks. Conceivably, those agencies have to learn such skills
before we can learn to build with blocks in the outside world of
object-things. Unfortunately, we know very little about how such
processes work. Indeed, we're virtually unaware that they even exist,
because these kinds of *commonsense* inferences and assumptions come to
mind without the slightest conscious effort or activity. Perhaps this
unawareness is a consequence of the speed with which those skills employ
the very same short-term memory-units that might otherwise be used to
record those agents' own recent activities.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
