<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [nearnesses](./som-11.3.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [sensing similarities](./som-11.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.4* innate geography
-----------------------

We've seen that touching nearby spots of skin will usually give rise to
similar sensations: this is because the corresponding nerves run in
parallel courses and thus cause similar activities inside the brain. The
reverse is also usually true: the more similar two sensations are, the
closer their origins in the skin. This has an important consequence:

The nerve pathways that preserve the physical nearness relations of our
skin-sensors can make it easy for inner agencies to discover
corresponding nearnesses about the outer world of space.

Moving your hand across an object tells you something about that
object's shape. Imagine what must happen when a very young infant moves
its hand across some object: each continuous motion produces a sequence
of skin-sensor signals. Over time, various mapping agents can first use
this information to learn, simply, which skin spots are nearest one
another. Later, further layers of mapping agents could learn which skin
spots lie between which others; this should be easy, too, because most
small-scale motions tend to go in nearly straight lines. But then, since
space itself is just a society of nearness relations between places,
this is all the information we need to *reconstruct* the spatial
structure of the skin. All this is in accord with a basic principle of
mathematics:

Suppose you were lost in some unknown space — and could only tell which
pairs of points were close to one another. That would be enough for you
to figure a great deal about the space. From that alone, you could
deduce if you were in a world of two dimensions or three. You could tell
where there were obstacles and boundaries, holes and tunnels and
bridges, and so on. You could figure out the global layout of that world
from just those local bits of information about nearnesses.

It is a wonderful fact that, in principle, one can deduce the global
geography of a space from nothing more than hints about which pairs of
points lie near one another! But it is another matter to actually make
such maps, and no one yet knows how the brain does this. To design a
machine to accomplish such tasks, one could begin with a layer of
*correlation agents,* one for each tiny patch of skin, each engineered
to detect which other skin spots are most often aroused at nearly the
same times; those will then be mapped as the nearest ones. A second
layer of similar agents could then begin to make maps of larger regions,
and several such layers would eventually assemble a sequence of maps on
various scales, for representing several levels of detail.

If brains do something of this sort, it might illuminate a problem that
has troubled some philosophers: *Why do we all agree on what the outer
world of space is like?* Why don't different people interpret space in
different, alien ways? In principle it is mathematically possible for
each person to conclude, for example, that the world is
three-dimensional — rather than two-or four-dimensional — just from
enough experience with nearby pairs of points. However, if the wires
from the skin to the brain were shuffled and scrambled around too much,
we would probably never get them straightened out because the actual
calculations for doing such things would be beyond our capabilities.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
