<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [magnitude and
marketplace](./som-28.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [mind over
matter](./som-28.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*28.3* quantity and quality
---------------------------

We've scarcely mentioned at all inside this book the kinds of quantities
that could be *measured* — though surely brain cells use them all the
time. For example, it seems quite likely that many of our agents employ
quantitative schemes for summarizing evidence or establishing the
strengths of connections. But I have said little about such matters
because I suspect that such matters play diminished roles, the more we
move toward higher-level operations of the mind. This is because
whenever we're forced to compare magnitudes, we have to pay a heavy
price: it tends to terminate what we call *thinking.*

Whenever we turn to measurements, we forfeit some uses of intellect.
Currencies and magnitudes help us make comparisons only by concealing
the differences among what they purport to represent.

By their nature, quantitative descriptions are so one-dimensional and
featureless that they cannot help but conceal the structures that give
rise to them. This is inescapable, since any act that makes two
different things comparable must do it by deflecting our attention from
their differences. Numbers themselves are the greatest masters of
disguise because they perfectly conceal all traces of their origins. Add
five and eight to make thirteen, and tell that answer to a friend:
thirteen will be all your friend can know, since no amount of ingenious
thought can ever show that it came from adding five and eight! It's much
the same inside the head: quantitative judgments help us make decisions
only by keeping us from thinking too much about the actual evidence.

No matter that such judgments have faults; you often have no choice but
to choose. This happens when you can't stay where you are and must turn
either right or left. Somewhere in some agencies, alternatives must be
compared — and sometimes one can find no way except by using currencies.
Then, various agents in your brain may turn to whatever quantities —
chemical, electrical, or whatever — that happen to be available. Any
substance or quantity whose availability is limited can be made to serve
as a currency. But when we make our theories about how such systems
work, we simply must remember not to make the easy mistake of confusing
those quantities with their adopted functions and thus, for example,
believing that certain drugs are inherently *stimulating* or
*depressing,* or that certain foodstuffs are inherently more *natural,*
or more *healthy.* Most of the properties of a currency are not inherent
— but merely conventional.

In any case, we should never assume that the quality or character of a
thought process depends directly on the nature of the circumstances that
evoke it. There is no quality of *sweetness* inherent in sugar itself,
which is a mere chemical. Its quality of sweetness is, in effect, a
currency involved with certain agencies that are connected to sensors
that detect the presence of sugar. Those agencies evolved that way
because whenever we have hunger goals, it pays to recognize the taste of
sugar as a *sign of success* — simply because sugar itself supplies
energy, is easy to detect, and usually indicates the presence of other
edible sources of nutrition. Similarly, inside our brains, many agencies
have come to influence one another by controlling the amounts of various
chemicals in much the way that many kinds of human transactions have
come to use substances like candy, coins, or bags of salt — or banknotes
backed by promises.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
