<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[sentence-frames](./som-26.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[story-frames](./som-26.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.4* a party-frame
--------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Your browser does not support the video tag.

Dictionary definitions never say enough. Every child knows that a party
is more than just a gathering assembled to celebrate someone's birthday.
But no brief definition can describe the complicated customs, rules, and
regulations that typical communities prescribe for such ceremonies. When
I was a child, a birthday party could be expected to include at least
the elements of the following script:

ARRIVAL. Greeting. Be well dressed. GIFT. Give birthday present to host
or guest of honor.

GAMES. Activities like blindfold competitions. DECOR. Balloons. Favors.
Crepe-paper decorations. PARTY-MEAL. Hotdogs, candies, ice-cream, etc.
CAKE. With candles to represent the host's age. CEREMONY. Host tries to
extinguish candles with single breath (to make a wish). SONG. All guests
sing birthday song and eat cake.

This is merely an outline, for every item leads to other conditions and
requirements. The birthday present has to please the host, of course,
but there are other strong constraints on it as well. It ought to be
brand new, of good quality, and it should not be ostentatiously
extravagant. It ought to be suitably *party-wrapped* â€” that is, covered
with a certain kind of color-printed wrapping paper and tied with
colored ribbon. There are also constraints on other items in the script.
The birthday cake should be covered with a sweet sugar frosting. In my
childhood, the ice cream usually consisted of three colored stripes of
different flavors: vanilla, strawberry, and chocolate. Because I did not
like the strawberry flavor, my personal party script included the extra
steps of finding another child willing to make a trade.

To all their young participants, such parties unfold exactly as a party
should, with all these queer complexities. We take our social customs
for granted, as though they were natural phenomena. Few guests or hosts
will ever wonder why their parties have those explicit forms or ask
about their origins. As far as any child can tell, that's just how
parties ought to go; they always did and always will. And so it is with
almost everything we know.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
