<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [understanding
words](./som-26.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[sentence-frames](./som-26.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.2* understanding stories
----------------------------

We'll now see how frames can help to explain how we understand that
children's tale. How do we know that the kite is a present for Jack —
when neither sentence mentioned this?

Mary was invited to Jack's party. She wondered if he would like a kite.

After the first sentence activates a party-invitation frame, the
reader's mind remains engaged with that frame's concerns — including the
question of what type of birthday gift to bring. If this concern is
represented by some subframe, what are the concerns of that subframe?
That present must be something that will please the party host. *Toy*
would be a good default for it, since that's the most usual kind of gift
for a child.

![](./illus/ch26/26-2.png){.illus} ![](./illus/ch26/26-3.png){.illus}

Since *Jack* is a *he* and a *kite* is a *toy,* these two frames will
merge perfectly — provided that the reader's frame for boy assumes that
Jack is likely to enjoy kites. Then our two sentences combine perfectly
to fill the present frame's terminals, and our problem is solved!

What makes a story comprehensible? What gives it coherency? The secret
lies in how each phrase and sentence stirs frames into activity or helps
already active ones to fill their terminals. When the first sentence of
our story mentions a party, various frames are excited — and these are
still active in the reader's mind when the next sentence is read. The
ground is prepared for understanding the second sentence because so many
agents are already ready to recognize possible references to presents,
clothes, and other matters that might be related to birthday parties.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
