<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [problems and
goals](./som-7.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [uncommon
sense](./som-7.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*7.1* intelligence
------------------

Many people insist on having some definition of *intelligence.*

CRITIC: How can we be sure that things like plants and stones, or storms
and streams, are not intelligent in ways that we have not yet conceived?

It doesn't seem a good idea to use the same word for different things,
unless one has in mind important ways in which they are the same. Plants
and streams don't seem very good at solving the kinds of problems we
regard as needing intelligence.

CRITIC: What's so special about solving problems? And why don't you
define *intelligence* precisely, so that we can agree on what we're
discussing?

That isn't a good idea, either. An author's job is using words the ways
other people do, not telling others how to use them. In the few places
the word *intelligence* appears in this book, it merely means what
people usually mean — the ability to solve hard problems.

CRITIC: Then you should define what you mean by a *hard* problem. We
know it took a lot of human intelligence to build the pyramids — yet
little coral reef animals build impressive structures on even larger
scales. So don't you have to consider them intelligent? Isn't it hard to
build gigantic coral reefs?

Yes, but it is only an illusion that animals can *solve* those problems!
No individual bird discovers a way to fly. Instead, each bird exploits a
solution that evolved from countless reptile years of evolution.
Similarly, although a person might find it very hard to design an
oriole's nest or a beaver's dam, no oriole or beaver ever figures out
such things at all. Those animals don't *solve* such problems
themselves; they only exploit procedures available within their
complicated gene-built brains.

CRITIC: Then wouldn't you be forced to say that evolution itself must be
intelligent, since it solved those problems of flying and building reefs
and nests?

No, because people also use the word *intelligence* to emphasize
swiftness and efficiency. Evolution's time rate is so slow that we don't
see it as intelligent, even though it finally produces wonderful things
we ourselves cannot yet make. Anyway, it isn't wise to treat an old,
vague word like *intelligence* as though it must define any definite
thing. Instead of trying to say what such a word *means,* it is better
simply to try to explain how we use it.

Our minds contain processes that enable us to solve problems we consider
difficult. *Intelligence* is our name for whichever of those processes
we don't yet understand.

Some people dislike this *definition* because its meaning is doomed to
keep changing as we learn more about psychology. But in my view that's
exactly how it ought to be, because the very concept of intelligence is
like a stage magician's trick. Like the concept of *the unexplored
regions of Africa,* it disappears as soon as we discover it.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
