<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the self](./som-4.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [one self or many?](./som-4.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*4.1* the self
--------------

> **self** *n.* 1. the identity, character, or essential qualities of
> any person or thing. 2. the identity, personality, individuality, etc.
> of a given person; one's own person as distinct from all others.
> —Webster's Unabridged Dictionary

Your browser does not support the video tag.

We all believe that human minds contain those special entities we call
selves. But no one agrees about what they are. To keep things straight,
I shall write *self* when speaking in a general sense about an entire
person and reserve *Self* for talking about that more mysterious sense
of personal identity. Here are some of the things people say about the
Self:

Self is the part of mind that's really me, or rather, it's the part of
me — that is, part of my mind — that actually does the thinking and
wanting and deciding and enjoying and

suffering. It's the part that's most important to me because it's that
which stays the same through all experience — the identity which ties
everything together. And whether you can treat it scientifically or not,
I know it's there, because it's me. Perhaps it's the sort of thing that
Science can't explain.

This isn't much of a definition, but I don't think it is a good idea to
try to find a better one. It often does more harm than good to force
definitions on things we don't understand. Besides, only in logic and
mathematics do definitions ever capture concepts perfectly. The things
we deal with in practical life are usually too complicated to be
represented by neat, compact expressions. Especially when it comes to
understanding minds, we still know so little that we can't be sure our
ideas about psychology are even aimed in the right directions. In any
case, one must not mistake defining things for knowing what they are.
You can know what a tiger is without defining it. You may define a
tiger, yet know scarcely anything about it.

Even if our old ideas about the mind are wrong, we can learn a lot by
trying to understand why we believe them. Instead of asking, *What are
Selves?* we can ask, instead, *What are our ideas about Selves?* — and
then we can ask, *What psychological functions do those ideas serve?*
When we do this, it shows us that we do not have one such idea, but
many.

Our ideas about our Selves include beliefs about what we are. These
include beliefs both about what we are capable of doing and about what
we may be disposed to do. We exploit these beliefs whenever we solve
problems or make plans. I'll refer to them, rather vaguely, as a
person's self-images. In addition to our self-images, our ideas about
ourselves also include ideas about what we'd like to be and ideas about
what we ought to be. These, which I'll call a person's self-ideals,
influence each person's growth from infancy, but we usually find them
hard to express because they're inaccessible to consciousness.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
