<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [conflict](./som-3.1.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [hierarchies](./som-3.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*3.2* Noncompromise
-------------------

To settle arguments, nations develop legal systems, corporations
establish policies, and individuals may argue, fight, or compromise — or
turn for help to mediators that lie outside themselves. What happens
when there are conflicts inside minds?

Whenever several agents have to compete for the same resources, they are
likely to get into conflicts. If those agents were left to themselves,
the conflicts might persist indefinitely, and this would leave those
agents paralyzed, unable to accomplish any goal. What happens then?
We'll assume that those agents' supervisors, too, are under competitive
pressure and likely to grow weak themselves whenever their subordinates
are slow in achieving their goals, no matter whether because of
conflicts between them or because of individual incompetence.

The Principle of Noncompromise: The longer an internal conflict persists
among an agent's subordinates, the weaker becomes that agent's status
among its own competitors. If such internal problems aren't settled
soon, other agents will take control and the agents formerly involved
will be *dismissed.*

So long as playing with blocks goes well, Play can maintain its strength
and keep control. In the meantime, though, the child may also be growing
hungry and sleepy, because other processes are arousing the agents Eat
and Sleep. So long as Eat and Sleep are not yet strongly activated, Play
can hold them both at bay. However, any conflict inside Play will weaken
it and make it easier for Eat or Sleep to take over. Of course, Eat or
Sleep must conquer in the end, since the longer they wait, the stronger
they get.

We see this in our own experience. We all know how easy it is to fight
off small distractions when things are going well. But once some trouble
starts inside our work, we become increasingly impatient and irritable.
Eventually we find it so hard to concentrate that the least disturbance
can allow another, different, interest to take control.

Now, when any of our agencies loses the power to control what other
systems do, that doesn't mean it has to cease its own internal activity.
An agency that has lost control can continue to work inside itself — and
thus become prepared to seize a later opportunity. However, we're
normally unaware of all those other activities proceeding deep inside
our minds.

Where does it stop, this process of yielding control to other agencies?
Must every mind contain some topmost center of control? Not necessarily.
We sometimes settle conflicts by appealing to superiors, but other
conflicts never end and never cease to trouble us.

At first, our principle of noncompromise may seem too extreme. After
all, good human supervisors plan ahead to avoid conflicts in the first
place, and — when they can't — they try to settle quarrels locally
before appealing to superiors. But we should not try to find a close
analogy between the low-level agents of a single mind and the members of
a human community. Those tiny mental agents simply cannot know enough to
be able to negotiate with one another or to find effective ways to
adjust to each other's interference. Only larger agencies could be
resourceful enough to do such things. Inside an actual child, the
agencies responsible for Building and Wrecking might indeed become
versatile enough to negotiate by offering support for one another's
goals. *Please, Wrecker, wait a moment more till Builder adds just one
more block: it's worth it for a louder crash!*

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
