<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the shape of
space](./som-11.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [innate
geography](./som-11.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.3* nearnesses
-----------------

The reason our skin can feel is because we're built with myriad nerves
that run from every skin spot to the brain. In general, each pair of
nearby places on the skin is wired to nearby places in the brain. This
is because those nerves tend to run in bundles of parallel fibers — more
or less like this:

![](./illus/ch11/11-2.png){.illus}

Each sensory experience involves the activity of many different sensors.
In general, the greater the extent to which two stimuli arouse the same
sensors, the more nearly alike will be the partial mental states those
stimuli produce — and the more similar those stimuli will *seem,* simply
because they'll tend to lead to similar mental consequences.

Other things being equal, the apparent similarity of two stimuli will
depend on the extent to which they lead to similar activities in other
agencies.

The fact that the nerves from skin to brain tend to run in parallel
bundles means that stimulating nearby spots of skin will usually lead to
rather similar activities inside the brain. In the next section we'll
see how this could enable an agency inside the brain to discover the
spatial layout of the skin. For example, as you move a finger along your
skin, new nerve endings are stimulated — and it is safe to assume that
the new arrivals represent spots of skin along the advancing edge of
your finger.

Given enough such information, a suitably designed agency could assemble
a sort of map to represent which spots are close together on the skin.
Because there are many irregularities in the nerve-bundle pathways from
skin to brain, the agencies that construct those maps must be able to
*tidy things up.* For example, the mapping agency must learn to correct
the sort of crossing-over shown in the diagram. But that is only the
beginning of the task. For a child, learning about the spatial world
beyond the skin is a journey that stretches over many years.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
