<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [boundaries](./som-13.2.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [children's
drawing-frames](./som-13.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.3* seeing and believing
---------------------------

![](./illus/ch13/13-6.png){.illus}

We normally assume that children see the same as we do and only lack our
tricky muscle skills. But that doesn't explain why so many children
produce this particular kind of drawing, nor why they seem so satisfied
with them. In any case, this phenomenon makes it seem very unlikely that
a child has a realistic, picturelike *image* in mind.

Now let's consider a different idea. We'll suppose that the child does
not have anything like a picture in mind, but only some network of
relationships that various *features* must satisfy. For example, a
child's *person-drawing* feature-network might consist of the following
features and relations:

![](./illus/ch13/13-7.png){.illus}

To convert this description into an actual drawing, the child must
employ some sort of *drawing procedure.* Here's one in which the process
simply works its way down the feature list, like a little computer
program:

![](./illus/ch13/13-8.png){.illus}

When the child starts to draw, the first item on the list is *large
closed figure.* Since there isn't any such thing yet, the child draws
one: that's the head. Next the eyes and mouth get drawn. But then, when
it comes to drawing the body feature, step 2 of the procedure finds that
a *large closed figure* has already been drawn. Accordingly, nothing new
is required, and the procedure simply advances to step 3. As a result,
the child goes on to attach the arms and legs to the feature that has
been assigned to both the body and the head.

An adult would never make such a *mistake,* since once some feature has
been assigned to represent a head, that feature is thereafter regarded
as *used up* or *occupied* and cannot represent anything else. But the
child has less capacity or inclination for *keeping track.* Accordingly,
since that *large closed figure* satisfies the description's
requirements for both the head and the body — albeit at different
moments of time — there is no cause for discontent. The little artist
has satisfied all the conditions required by its description!

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
