<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [trans-frames](./som-21.3.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [automatism](./som-21.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*21.4* communication among agents
---------------------------------

If agents had huge minds like ours, they could talk the way people do —
and Add could say, *Please, Get an apple and Put it in the pail.*
Perhaps our largest agencies can deal with messages like that, but
smaller agencies like Get cannot interpret such expressions because
they're much too specialized to understand complicated wants and needs.
Then how could Get know what to get — in order to find an apple rather
than a block, a fork, or a paper doll? To examine this problem, we'll
have to make some assumptions about what happens in a listener's mind.
For the moment, let's simply assume that the result is to activate a
Builder-like society with these ingredients:

![](./illus/ch21/21-4.png){.illus}

At first sight, it seems as though all these agents are involved with
the apple and the pail. But a closer look shows only the low-level
agents Look-for and Grasp are actually concerned with the physical
aspects of actual objects; all the others are merely *middle-level
managers.* For example, the agent Get doesn't actually *get* anything;
it only turns on Find and Grasp at the proper time. To be sure, Look-for
will need some information about what to look for — that is, about an
apple's appearance, and Move will need information about the apple's
actual location. Nevertheless, we'll see that this information can
become available to those agents without any need for messages from Get.
To see how agents can operate without explicit messages, let's compare
two ordinary language descriptions of how to put an apple into a pail.
Our first script mentions each object explicitly in every line, the way
one might speak to a novice.

Look for an apple. Move the arm and hand to the apple's location.
Prepare the hand to grasp an apple-shaped object. Grasp the apple. Now
look for the pail. Move the arm and hand to the pail's location. Release
the hand's grip on the apple.

Now let's rewrite this description in a style more typical of normal
speech.

Look for an apple. Move the arm and hand to its location. Prepare the
hand to grasp an object of that shape. Grasp it. Now look for the pail.
Move the arm and hand to its location. Release the hand's grip.

This second script uses the words *apple* and *pail* only once. This is
how we usually speak; once something has been mentioned, we normally
don't use its name again. Instead, whenever possible, we replace a name
by a pronoun word. In the next few sections I'll argue that it is not
only in language that we replace things with pronounlike tokens; we also
do this in many other forms of thought. It could scarcely be otherwise,
because in order to make sense to us, our sentences must mirror the
structures and methods we use for managing our memories.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
