<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the shape of
space](./som-11.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [the shape of
space](./som-11.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*11.1* seeing red
-----------------

What possible kind of brain-event could correspond to anything like the
meaning of an ordinary word? When you say *red,* your vocal cords obey
commands from *pronouncing agents* in your brain, which make your chest
and larynx muscles move to produce that special sound. These agents must
in turn receive commands from somewhere else, where other agents respond
to signals from yet other places. All those *places* must comprise the
parts of some society of mental agencies.

![](./illus/ch11/11-1.png){.illus}

It's easy to design a machine to tell when there is something red: start
with sensors that respond to different hues of light, and connect the
ones most sensitive to red to a central *red-agent,* making corrections
for the color of the lighting of the scene. We could make this machine
appear to *speak* by linking each color-agent to a device that
pronounces the corresponding word. Then this machine could name the
colors it *sees* â€” and even distinguish more hues than ordinary people
can. But it would be a travesty to call this *sight,* since it's nothing
but a catalog that lists a lot of colored dots. It would share no human
notion of what colors come to mean to us, because without some sense of
texture, form, and very much more, it would have few of the qualities of
our human kinds of images and thoughts.

Of course no little diagram can capture more than a fragment of any real
person's thoughts about the world. But this should not be taken to mean
that no machine could ever have the range of sensibilities that people
have. It merely means that we aren't simple machines; indeed, we should
understand that in learning to comprehend the qualities of vast
machines, we are still in the dark ages. And in any case, a diagram can
only illustrate a principle: there cannot be any compact way to
represent all the details of full-grown mind-society. To talk about such
complex things, we can only resort to language tricks that make our
listeners' minds explore the worlds inside themselves.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
