<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the
language-agency](./som-19.2.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[objects and properties](./som-19.4.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*19.3* words and ideas
----------------------

Your browser does not support the video tag.

How does an insubstantial word like *apple* lead you to think of a real
thing — an object of a certain size that is red, round, sweet, and has a
shiny, thin-peeled skin? How could a plain acoustic sound produce such
complex states of mind, involving all those qualities of color,
substance, taste, and shape? Presumably, each different quality involves
a different agency. But then — in view of all we've said about why
different agents can't communicate — how could such varying recipients
all *understand* the selfsame messages? Do language- agents have unusual
abilities to communicate with different kinds of agencies?

Many people have tried to explain language as though it were separate
from the rest of psychology. Indeed, the study of language itself was
often divided into smaller subjects, called by traditional names like
syntax, grammar, and semantics. But because there was no larger,
coherent theory of thinking to which to attach those fragments, they
tended to lose contact with one another and with reality. Once we assume
that language and thought are different things, we're lost in trying to
piece together what was never separate in the first place. This is why,
in the following pages, I'll put aside most of the old language theories
and return to the questions that led to them:

How are words involved with mental processes? How does language enable
people to communicate?

In the next few sections, we'll introduce two kinds of agents that
contribute to the power of words. The first kind, called *polynemes,*
are involved with our long-term memories. A polyneme is a type of
K-line; it sends the same, simple signal to many different agencies:
each of those agencies must learn, for itself, what to do when it
receives that signal. When you hear the word *apple,* a certain polyneme
is aroused, and the signal from this polyneme will put your Color agency
into a state that represents redness. The same signal will set your
Shape agency into a state that represents roundness, and so forth. Thus,
the polyneme for *apple* is really very simple; it knows nothing
whatever about apples, colors, shapes, or anything else. It is merely a
switch that turns on processes in other agencies, each of which has
learned to respond in its own way.

Later we'll discuss another type of language-agent that we'll call an
*isonome.* Each isonome controls a short-term memory in each of many
agencies. For example, suppose we had just been talking about a certain
apple, and then I said, *Please put it in this pail.* In this case, you
would assume that the word *it* refers to the apple. However, if we had
been discussing your left shoe, you would assume *it* referred to that
shoe. A word like *it* excites an isonome whose signal has no particular
significance by itself, but controls what various agencies do with
certain recent memories.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
