<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [learning
meaning](./som-12.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [learning
meaning](./som-12.2.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*12.1* a block-arch scenario
----------------------------

Our child, playing with some blocks and a toy car, happens to build this
structure. Let's call it a Block-Arch.

![](./illus/ch12/12-1.png){.illus}

Block-Arch seems to cause a strange new phenomenon: when you push the
car through it, your arm gets trapped! Then, in order to complete that
action, you must release the car — and reach around to the other side of
the arch, perhaps by changing hands. The child becomes interested in
this *Hand-Change* phenomenon and wonders how Block-Arch causes it. Soon
the child finds another structure that seems similar — except that
Hand-Change disappears because you can't even push the car through it.
Yet both structures fit the same description!

![](./illus/ch12/12-2.png){.illus}

But if Block-Arch causes Hand-Change, then this can't be a block-arch.
So the child must find some way to change the mental description of
Block-Arch so it won't apply to this. What is the difference between
them? Perhaps this is because those standing blocks now touch one
another, when they didn't touch before. We could adapt to this by
changing our description of Block-Arch: *There must be two standing
blocks and a lying block. The standing blocks must not touch.* But even
this does not suffice, because the child soon finds yet another
structure that matches this description. Here, too, the Hand-Change
phenomenon has disappeared; now you can push the car through it without
letting go!

![](./illus/ch12/12-3.png){.illus}

Again we must change our description to keep this from being considered
a Block-Arch. Finally the child discovers another variation that does
produce Hand-Change:

![](./illus/ch12/12-4.png){.illus}

Our child has constructed for itself a useful conception of an arch,
based entirely upon its own experience.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
