<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [long-range
plans](./som-4.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[individuality](./som-5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*4.8* ideals
------------

We usually reserve the word *ideals* to refer to how we think we ought
to conduct our ethical affairs. But I'll use the term in a broader
sense, to include the standards we maintain — consciously or otherwise —
for how we ought to think about ordinary matters.

We're always involved with goals of varying spans and scales. What
happens when a transient inclination clashes with a long-term
self-ideal? What happens, for that matter, when our ideals disagree
among themselves, as when there is an inconsistency between the things
we want to do and those we feel we ought to do? These disparities give
rise to feelings of discomfort, guilt, and shame. To lessen such
disturbances, we must either change the things we do — or change the
ways we feel. Which should we try to modify — our immediate wants or our
ideals? Such conflicts must be settled by the multilayered agencies that
are formed in the early years of the growth of our personalities.

In childhood, our agencies acquire various types of goals. Then we grow
in overlapping waves, in which our older agencies affect the making of
the new. This way, the older agencies can influence how our later ones
will behave. Outside the individual, similar processes go on in every
human community; we find children *taking after* persons other than
themselves by absorbing values from their parents, families, and peers,
even from the heroes and villains of mythology.

Without enduring self-ideals, our lives would lack coherence. As
individuals, we'd never be able to trust ourselves to carry out our
personal plans. In a social group, no one person would be able to trust
the others. A working society must evolve mechanisms that stabilize
ideals — and many of the social principles that each of us regards as
personal are really *long-term memories* in which our cultures store
what they have learned across the centuries.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
