<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [uniframes](./som-12.3.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [the function of
structures](./som-12.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*12.4* structure and function
-----------------------------

Suppose an adult watched our child and said, *I see you've built an
arch.* What might the child think this means? To learn new words or new
ideas, one must make connections to other structures in the mind. *I see
you've built an arch* should make the child connect the word *arch* to
agencies embodying descriptions of both the Block-Arch and the
Hand-Change phenomena — since those are what is on the child's mind.

![](./illus/ch12/12-6.png){.illus}

But one can't learn what something means merely by tying things to
names. Each word-idea must also be invested with some causes, actions,
purposes, and explanations. Consider all the things a word like *arch*
must mean to any real child who understands how arches work and how
they're made, and all the ways one can use them! A real child will have
noticed, too, that arches are like variants of many other things
experienced before, like *bridge without a road,* *wall with door,*
*tablelike,* or *shaped like an upside-down U.* We can use such
similarities to help find other things to serve our purposes: to think
of an arch as a passage, hole, or tunnel could help someone concerned
with a transportation problem; describing an arch as *top held up by
sides* could help a person get to something out of reach. Which kind of
description serves us best? That depends upon our purposes.

Among our most powerful ways of thinking are those that let us bring
together things we've learned in different contexts. But how can one
think in two different ways at once? By building, somewhere inside the
mind, some arches of a different kind:

![](./illus/ch12/12-7.png){.illus}

Is that a foolish metaphor — to talk of building bridges between places
in the mind? I'm sure it's not an accident that we so often frame our
thoughts in terms of familiar spatial forms. Much of how we think in
later life is based on what we learn in early life about the world of
space.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
