<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mental states and
dispositions](./som-8.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[level-bands](./som-8.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.4* partial mental states
---------------------------

We make our new ideas by merging parts of older ones — and that means
keeping more than one idea in mind at once. Let's oversimplify matters
for the moment and imagine that the mind is composed of many
*divisions,* each involved with a different activity, like vision,
locomotion, language, and so forth. This pattern repeats on smaller
scales, so that even the thought of the simplest ordinary object is made
up of smaller thoughts in smaller agencies. Thinking about a small white
rubber ball could activate some divisions like these:

![](./illus/ch8/8-4.png){.illus}

We'll need some way to talk about the states of many agencies at once.
So, in this book, I'll use the expression *mental state* or *total
mental state* when talking about the states of all of one's agents. The
new phrase *partial mental state* is for talking about the states of
smaller groups of agents. Now in order to be clear, we'll have to
simplify our picture of the situation, the way scientists do. We shall
assume that each agent in our society, at each moment, is either in a
*quiet state* or an *active state.* Why can't an agent be partially
aroused, instead of only *on* or *off*? They could indeed, but there are
technical reasons why this would not make any fundamental difference to
the issues we are discussing here. In any case, this assumption allows
us to be precise:

A *total state* of mind is a list that specifies which agents are active
and which are quiet at a certain moment. A *partial state* of mind
merely specifies that certain agents are active but does not say which
other agents are quiet.

Notice that according to this definition, a mind can have exactly one
total state at any moment, but it can be in many partial states at the
same time — because partial states are incomplete descriptions. The
picture above shows a mind-society made up of several separate
divisions, so we can think of each division's state as one partial
state, and this lets us imagine that the entire system can *think
several thoughts at once,* just as a crowd of separate people can. When
your speech division is being occupied with what your friend is saying
while your vision division looks for a door to exit through — then your
mind is in two partial states at once.

The situation is more interesting when two K-lines activate agents in
the same division at the same time: imposing two different partial
mental states on the same agency can lead to conflicts. It is easy to
think of a small white ball because this activates K-lines that connect
to unrelated sets of agents. But when you try to imagine a round square,
your agents for round and square are forced to compete to control the
same set of shape-describing agents. If the conflict is not settled
soon, noncompromise may eliminate both — and leave you with the sense of
an undefined shape.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
