<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the realms of
thought](./som-29.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[paranomes](./som-29.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*29.2* several thoughts at once
-------------------------------

To see that we can think in several mental realms at once, consider the
role of the word *give* in this simple sentence:

Mary gives Jack the kite.

We can see at least three distinct meanings here. First, we could
represent the idea of the kite's motion through physical space by using
a Trans-frame whose Trajectory begins at Mary's hand and ends at Jack's.

![](./illus/ch29/29-3.png){.illus}

But quite beyond that realm of space, we also find a different
significance in what Mary did — in another realm that we'll call

*estates.* This involves a different sense of *give,* in which the
object need not actually move at all! Instead, what happens is the
transfer of its ownership.

![](./illus/ch29/29-4.png){.illus}

Each of us has an *estate* — the collection of possessions we control.
And this *realm of estate* is more important than it might seem, because
it lies between the realms of objects and ideas. In order to carry out
our plans, it is not enough only to know what things or ideas are
required and how to adapt them to our purposes. We must also be able to
take possession of those objects or ideas, either by right or by might.

Possession plays essential roles in all our plans, because we can't use
any materials, tools, or ideas until we gain control of them.

We can also interpret Mary's act within a social realm, in which we
understand that giving gifts involves yet other kinds of relationships.
No sooner do you hear of Mary's gift than certain parts of your mind
become concerned with why she was so generous and how this involved her
affections and obligations.

![](./illus/ch29/29-5.png){.illus}

How can so many different thoughts proceed at the same time, without
interfering with one another? I suspect that it is for the same reason
that we have no trouble imagining an apple as both round and red at the
same time: in that case, the processes for color and shape use agents
that do not compete. Similarly, the different processes involved with
ideas like *give* may operate in agencies so different that they rarely
need to compete for the same resources.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
