<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [mental
models](./som-30.3.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [knowing
ourselves](./som-30.5.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*30.4* world models
-------------------

Now let's look at Mary's model of the world. (By *world* I mean the
universe, not just the planet Earth.) This is simply all the structures
in Mary's head that Mary's agencies can use to answer questions about
things in the world.

![](./illus/ch30/30-2.png){.illus}

But what if we were to ask Mary a question not about any particular
object, but one like *What sort of thing is the world itself?* That
would put Mary in a curious predicament. She cannot answer this by using
her world model, because each part of that model is designed only to
answer questions about particular things. The trouble is that the world
itself is not a particular thing inside the world.

One way to deal with this (and a method that, surely, many children use)
is adding to the model of the world an additional *object* — that
represents the world itself. Then, since any object must have
properties, the child might then assign to this the features, say, of an
extremely large ball. Naturally this will lead to trouble should that
child persist in asking ordinary questions about this extraordinary
object — such as *What keeps the universe in place?* or *What's outside
the universe?* — for these then lead to strange and inconsistent images.
Eventually we learn some ways to deal with this — for example, by
learning which questions to suppress. But as in the case of a perfect
point, we may always feel uncomfortable with the thought of a thing that
is unimaginably large in size, but has no shape at all.

When you get right down to it, you can never really describe any worldly
thing, either — that is, in any absolute sense. Whatever you purport to
say about a thing, you're only expressing your own beliefs. Yet even
that gloomy thought suggests an insight. Even if our models of the world
cannot yield good answers about the world as a whole, and even though
their other answers are frequently wrong, they can tell us something
about ourselves. We can regard what we learn about our models of the
world as constituting our models of our models of the world.

![](./illus/ch30/30-3.png){.illus}

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
