<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [strong
arguments](./som-18.5.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [what is a
number?](./som-18.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.6* magnitude from multitude
-------------------------------

We like to think of reasoning as rational — yet we often represent our
arguments as fights between adversaries positioned to determine which
can wield the greater strength or force. Why do we use such energetic
and aggressive images of weakness, strength, defeat, and victory, of
boxing in and breaking down an enemy's defense? Why don't we just use
cool, clear, faultless reasoning to prove we are right? The answer is
that we rarely need to know that anything is absolutely wrong or right;
instead, we only want to choose the best of some alternatives.

Here are two different strategies for deciding whether one group of
reasons should be considered *stronger* than another. The first strategy
tries to compare opposing arguments in terms of magnitudes, by analogy
to how two physical forces interact:

Strength from Magnitude: When two forces work together, they add to form
a single larger force. But when two forces oppose each other directly,
their strengths subtract.

Our second strategy is simply to count how many different reasons you
can find for choosing each alternative:

Strength from Multitude: The more reasons we can find in favor of a
particular decision, the more confidence we can have in it. This is
because if some of those reasons turn out to be wrong, other reasons may
still remain.

Whichever strategy we use, we tend to speak of the winning argument as
the *stronger* one. But why do we use the same word *strong* for two
such different strategies? It is because we use them both for the same
purpose: to reduce the likelihood of failure. It comes out the same in
the end, whether we base a decision on a single *strong* argument — that
is, one unlikely to be wrong — or on several weaker arguments, in hopes
that they won't fail all at once.

What makes us so prone to formulate our reasoning in terms of
conflicting adversaries? It must be partly cultural, but some of it
could also be based on inheritance. When we use architectural metaphors
that speak of arguments as not supported properly, we could be
exploiting structures that evolved within our spatial agencies.
Similarly, when we represent our reasoning in terms of battling
adversaries, we might be exploiting the use of agencies that first
evolved for physical defense.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
