<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [Heterarchies](./som-3.4.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [Pain and pleasure
simplified](./som-3.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*3.5* destructiveness
---------------------

In any actual child's mind, the urge to Play competes with other
demanding urges, such as Eat and Sleep. What happens if another agent
wrests control from Play, and what happens to the agents Play
controlled?

![](./illus/ch3/3-4.png){.illus}

Suppose that our child is called away, no matter whether by someone else
or by an internal urge like Sleep. What happens to the processes
remaining active in the mind? One part of the child may still want to
play, while another part wants to sleep. Perhaps the child will knock
the tower down with a sudden, vengeful kick. What does it mean when
children make such scenes? Is it that inner discipline breaks down to
cause those savage acts? Not necessarily. Those *childish* acts might
still make sense in other ways.

Smashing takes so little time that Wrecker, freed from Play's
constraint, need persist for only one more kick to gain the satisfaction
of a final crash.

Though childish violence might seem senseless by itself, it serves to
communicate frustration at the loss of goal. Even if the parent scolds,
that just confirms how well the message was transmitted and received.
Destructive acts can serve constructive goals by leaving fewer problems
to be solved. That kick may leave a mess outside, yet tidy up the
child's mind.

When children smash their treasured toys, we shouldn't ask for the
reason why — since no such act has a single cause. Besides, it isn't
true in a human mind that, when Sleep starts, then Play must quit and
all its agents have to cease. A real child can go to bed — yet still
build towers in its head.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
