<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [must machines be
logical?](./som-18.1.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[chaining](./som-18.3.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*18.2* chains of reasoning
--------------------------

Here's a rule that's part of ordinary common sense: If A depends on B,
and B depends on C, then — clearly — A depends on C. But what do such
expressions mean? And why do we make the same kinds of inferences not
only for dependency but also for implication and causality?

If A depends on B, and, also, B depends on C, then A depends on C. If A
implies B, and, also, B implies C, then A implies C. If A causes B, and,
also, B causes C, then A causes C.

What do all these different ideas have in common? All lend themselves to
being linked into chainlike strings. Whenever we discover such sequences
— however long they may be — we regard it as completely natural to
compress them into single links, by deleting all but the beginning and
the end. This lets us *conclude,* for example, that A depends on,
implies, or causes C. We do this even with imaginary paths through time
and space.

Floor holds Table holds Saucer holds Cup holds Tea Wheel turns Shaft
turns Gear turns Shaft turns Gear Sometimes we even chain together
different kinds of links:

House walk to Garage drive to Airport fly to Airport Owls are Birds, and
Birds can Fly. So, Owls can Fly.

The chain containing *walk,* *drive,* and *fly* may appear to use
several different kinds of links. But although they differ in regard to
vehicles, they all refer to paths through space. And in the Owl-Bird
example, *are* and *can* seem more different at first, but we can
translate them both into a more uniform language by changing *Owls are
Birds* into *An Owl is a Typical-Bird* and *Birds can Fly* into *A
Typical-Bird is a thing-which-can-Fly.* Both sentences then share the
same type of *is a* link, and this allows us to chain them together more
easily.

For generations, scientists and philosophers have tried to explain
ordinary reasoning in terms of logical principles — with virtually no
success. I suspect this enterprise failed because it was looking in the
wrong direction: common sense works so well not because it is an
approximation of logic; logic is only a small part of our great
accumulation of different, useful ways to chain things together. Many
thinkers have assumed that logical necessity lies at the heart of our
reasoning. But for the purposes of psychology, we'd do better to set
aside the dubious ideal of faultless deduction and try, instead, to
understand how people actually deal with what is usual or typical. To do
this, we often think in terms of causes, similarities, and dependencies.
What do all these forms of thinking share? They all use different ways
to make chains.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
