<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [objects and
properties](./som-19.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[recognizers](./som-19.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*19.5* polynemes
----------------

What happens when a single agent sends messages to several different
agencies? In many cases, such a message will have a different effect on
each of those other agencies. As I mentioned earlier, I'll call such an
agent a *polyneme.* For example, your word-agent for the word *apple*
must be a polyneme because it sets your agencies for color, shape, and
size into unrelated states that represent the independent properties of
being red, round, and *apple-sized.*

![](./illus/ch19/19-2.png){.illus}

But how could the same message come to have such diverse effects on so
many agencies, with each effect so specifically appropriate to the idea
of *apple*? There is only one explanation: Each of those other agencies
must already have learned its own response to that same signal. Because
polynemes, like politicians, mean different things to different
listeners, each listener must learn its own, different way to react to
that message. (The prefix poly- is to suggest diversity, and the suffix
-neme is to indicate how this depends on memory.)

To understand a polyneme, each agency must learn its own specific and
appropriate response. Each agency must have its private dictionary or
memory bank to tell it how to respond to every polyneme.

How could all those agencies learn how to respond to each polyneme? If
each polyneme were connected to a K-line in each agency, each of those
K-lines would need only to learn what partial state to arouse inside its
agency. The drawing below suggests that those K-lines could form little
*memorizers* next to the agencies that they affect. Thus, memories are
formed and stored close to the places where they are used.

![](./illus/ch19/19-3.png){.illus}

Can any simple scheme like this give rise to all the richness of the
meaning of a real language-word? The answer is that all ideas about
meaning will seem inadequate by themselves, since nothing can mean
anything except within some larger context of ideas.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
