<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [world models](./som-30.4.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [freedom of will](./som-30.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*30.5* knowing ourselves
------------------------

Now let's ask Mary to describe herself — to tell us everything she can
about her shape and weight and size and strength, her dispositions and
her traits, her accomplishments and ambitions, wishes, fears,
possessions, and so on. What might be the general character of what we'd
hear? At first it would be hard to assemble any coherent sense of all
those details. But gradually we'd notice that various groups of items
were closely related, while others were rarely mentioned in connection
with one another. Little by little, we would discern structure and
organization in what Mary had said, and finally we'd start to see the
outlines of at least two different mental realms.

![](./illus/ch30/30-4.png){.illus}

Now, what would happen if we asked Mary to speak not about specific
things, but about the general subject of *What kind of entity am I?*
Since she has no direct way to examine her entire self, she can only
summarize what she can discover about her mental model of herself. In
doing so, she'll probably find that almost everything she knows appears
to lie in two domains, with relatively little in between. This means
that Mary's model of her model of herself will have an overall dumbbell
shape, one side of which represents her physical self, the other side of
which represents her psychological self.

Do people go on to make models of their models of their models of
themselves? If we kept on doing things like that, we'd get trapped in an
infinite regress. What saves us is that we get confused and lose track
of the distinctions between each model and the next — just as our
language-agencies lose track when they hear about *the rat that the cat
that the dog worried killed.* The same thing must happen whenever we ask
ourselves questions like *Did John know that I knew that he knew that I
knew that he knew that?* And the same thing happens whenever we try to
probe into our own motivations by continually repeating, *What was my
motive for wanting that?*

Eventually, we simply stop and say, *Because I simply wanted to.* The
same when we find things hard to decide: we can simply say, *I just
decide,* and this can help us interrupt what otherwise might be an
endless chain of reasoning.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
