<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [the frontier
effect](./som-13.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[reformulation](./som-14.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*13.7* duplications
-------------------

Sometimes when we watch a scene, the wholes we see *add up* exactly to
the sum of their separate parts. But other times, we do not mind if
certain things get counted twice. In the first figure below, we divide
an arch into body and support with no concern that both parts have
exactly the same boundaries. In the second figure, we seem to see two
complete arches, despite the fact that there aren't enough legs to make
two separate arches.

![](./illus/ch13/13-16.png){.illus}

Sometimes it is vital to keep track, to count each thing exactly once.
But in other situations, no harm will come from counting twice. It is
efficient to use the same block twice when making viaducts for roads for
cars. But if we tried to use the same five blocks to build two separate
bridges, we'd end up short. Different kinds of goals require different
styles of description. When we discussed the concept of More, we saw how
each child must learn when to describe things in terms of appearance and
when to think in terms of past experience. The double-arch problem also
offers a choice of description styles. If you plan to build several
separate things, you'd better keep count carefully or take the risk of
running out of parts. But if you do that all the time, you'll miss your
chance to make one object serve two purposes at once.

We could also formulate this as a choice between structural and
functional descriptions. Suppose we tried to make a match between the
structural elements of the double-arch and those of two separate
block-arches. In one way to do that, we would first assign three blocks
to each arch — and then verify that each arch consists of a top
supported by two blocks that do not touch. Then, of course, we'll only
find a single three-block arch. There isn't any second arch, since there
are only two blocks left.

On the other hand, we could base our description of the double-arch
scene on the more functional body-support style of description.
According to that approach, we must focus first on the most *essential*
parts. The most essential part of an arch is its top block — and we do
indeed find two blocks that could serve as top blocks. Then we need only
verify that each of them is supported by two blocks that do not touch —
and this is indeed the case. In a function-oriented approach, it seems
natural to count carefully the most essential elements, but merely to
verify that the functions of the auxiliary elements will somehow be
served. The functional type of description is easier to adapt to the
purposes of higher-level agencies. This doesn't mean that functional
descriptions are necessarily better. They can make it hard to keep track
of real constraints; hence they have a certain tendency to lead toward
overoptimistic, wishful thought.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
