<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [jokes](./som-27.5.html)</span><span
class="next">Next: [laughter](./som-27.7.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*27.6* humor and censorship
---------------------------

People often wonder if a computer could ever have a sense of humor. This
question seems natural to those who think of humor as a pleasant but
unnecessary luxury. But I'll argue quite the opposite — that humor has a
practical and possibly essential function in how we learn.

When we learn in a serious context, the result is to change connections
among ordinary agents. But when we learn in a humorous context, the
principal result is to change the connections that involve our censors
and suppressors.

In other words, my theory is that humor is involved with how our censors
learn; it is mainly involved with *negative* thinking, though people
rarely realize this. Why use such a distinct and peculiar medium as
humor for this purpose? Because we must make a sharp distinction between
our positive, action-oriented memories and the negative, inhibitory
memories embodied in our censors.

Positive memory-agents must learn which mental states are desirable.
Negative memory-agents must learn which mental states are undesirable.

Because these two types of learning required different processes, it was
natural to evolve social signals to communicate that distinction. When
people do things that we regard as good, we speak to them in encouraging
tones — and this switches on their positive learning machinery. However,
when people do things we consider stupid or wrong, we then complain in
scornful tones or laugh derisively; this switches on their negative
learning machinery. I suspect that scolding and laughing have somewhat
different effects: scolding tends to produce suppressors, but laughing
tends to produce censors. Accordingly, the effect of derisive humor is
somewhat more likely to disrupt our present activity. This is because
the process of constructing a censor deprives us of the use of our
temporary memories, which must be frozen to maintain the records of our
recent states of mind.

Suppressors merely need to learn which mental states are undesirable.
Censors must remember and learn which mental states were undesirable.

To see why humor is so often concerned with prohibition, consider that
our most productive forms of thought are just the ones most subject to
mistakes. We can make fewer errors by confining ourselves to cautious,
*logical* reasoning, but we'll also discover fewer new ideas. More can
be gained by using metaphors and analogies, even though they are often
defective and misleading. I think this is why so many jokes are based on
recognizing inappropriate comparisons. Why, by the way, do we so rarely
recognize the negative character of humor itself? Perhaps it has a funny
side effect: while shutting off those censored thoughts, our censors
also shut off thoughts about themselves — and make themselves invisible.

This solves Freud's problem about nonsense jokes. The taboos that grow
within social communities can be learned only from other people. But
when it comes to intellectual mistakes, a child needs no helpful friend
to scold it when a tower falls, when it puts a spoon in its ear, or
thinks a thought that sets its mind into a fruitless and confusing loop.
In other words, we can detect many of our own intellectual failures all
by ourselves. Freud's theory of jokes was based on the idea that censors
suppress thoughts that would be considered *naughty* by those to whom we
are attached. He must simply have overlooked the fact that ineffectual
reasoning is equally *naughty* — and therefore equally *funny* — in the
sense that it, too, ought to be suppressed. There is no need for our
censors to distinguish between social incompetence and intellectual
stupidity.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
