<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous:
[picture-frames](./som-24.7.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[recognizers and memorizers](./som-24.9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*24.8* how picture-frames work
------------------------------

Now that we've seen how *picture-frames* could represent memories of
spatial arrangements, let's ask how we actually build such frames. We'll
use the same technique that we used to build Trans-frames, except for
one small change. To make a picture-frame, we'll simply replace the
pronomes of our Trans-frame scheme by a set of nine direction-nemes! The
diagram below also includes an agent to serve for turning on the frame
itself.

![](./illus/ch24/24-5.png){.illus}

To apply the picture-frames idea to how our vision-systems work, imagine
that you're looking at some real-world scene. Your eyes move in various
directions, controlled in some way by direction-nemes. Now suppose that
every time you move your eyes, the same direction-nemes also activate
the K-lines attached to the corresponding terminals of a certain
vision-frame. Suppose, also, that those K-lines are ready to form new
memories. Then each time you look in a different direction, your
vision-system will describe what you see — and the corresponding K-line
will record what you see when you look in that direction!

Now suppose that the same frame is activated at some later date — but
this time by means of memory and not from looking at some scene. Then,
as any of your agencies conceives of looking in a certain direction, the
thought itself will involve the activation of the corresponding
direction-neme; then, before you have a chance to think of anything
else, the corresponding K-line will be aroused. This creates a most
remarkable effect:

Whichever way your *mind's eye* looks, you'll seem to see the
corresponding aspect of the scene. You will experience an almost perfect
*simulus* of being there!

How *real* could such a recollection seem? In principle, it could even
seem as real as vision itself — since it could make you seem to sense
not only how an object looks, but also how it tastes and feels. Shortly
we'll see how this could yield not merely the sense of seeing a scene,
but also the sense of being able to move around inside it.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
