<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [sentence and
nonsense](./som-26.6.html)</span><span class="next">Next: [frames for
verbs](./som-26.8.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*26.7* frames for nouns
-----------------------

At various points in their development, most children seem suddenly to
comprehend new kinds of sentences. Thus, once they learn to deal with
single adjectives, some children quickly learn to deal with longer
strings like these:

Dogs bark. Big dogs bark. Big shaggy dogs bark. Big black shaggy dogs
bark.

If this were done by using word-string sentence-frames, it would require
a separate frame for each different number of adjectives. Another scheme
would not use any frames at all but have the language-agency convert
each adjective, as it arrives, into some corresponding neme. And yet
another scheme to handle this (still popular among some grammar
theorists) would have each successive adjective arouse a new subframe
inside the previous one. However, when we look more closely at how
people use adjectives, we find that these strings are not simple at all.
Compare the two phrases below:

The wooden three heavy brown big first boxes . . . The first three big
brown heavy wooden boxes . . .

Our language-agents scarcely know what to do with that first string of
words because it doesn't fit the patterns we normally use for describing
things. This suggests that we use framelike structures for describing
nouns as well as verbs — that is, for describing things as well as
actions. To fill the terminals of those frames, we expect their
ingredients to arrive in a more or less definite order. We find it hard
to understand a group of English adjectives unless they are arranged
roughly as shown below.

![](./illus/ch26/26-12.png){.illus}

Whenever a language community can agree on forms like these, expression
becomes easier. Then every individual can learn, once and for all, where
to put — and where to find — the answers to questions most frequently
asked. In English one learns to say *green box,* while in French one
says *box green.* It doesn't matter which order is used — as long as
everyone agrees to do it the same way. But what are the *questions most
frequently asked* — the ones we build into our language-forms? The
answer to this is likely to be somewhat circular, since the language
culture in which we're raised will probably affect the kinds of
questions that will seem most natural to ask. Still, there could be
useful clues in features that are common to many different languages.

Many scientists have asked, indeed, why so many human languages use
similar structures such as nouns, adjectives, verbs, clauses, and
sentences. It is likely that some of these reflect what is genetically
built into our language-agencies. But it seems to me even more likely
that most of these nearly universal language-forms scarcely depend on
language at all — but reflect how descriptions are formed in other
agencies. The most common forms of phrases could arise not so much from
the architecture of the language-agencies as from the machinery used by
other agencies for representing objects, actions, differences, and
purposes — as suggested in section 22.7 — and from how those other
agencies manipulate their memories. In short, the ways we think must
have a strong and universal influence on how we speak — if only through
its influence on the sorts of things we'll want to say.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
