<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [personal
identity](./som-5.4.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[traits](./som-5.6.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*5.5* fashion and style
-----------------------

Why do we like so many things that seem to us to have no earthly use? We
often speak of this with mixtures of defensiveness and pride.

-   Art for Art's sake.
-   I find it aesthetically pleasing.
-   I just like it.
-   There's no accounting for it.

Why do we take refuge in such vague, defiant declarations? *There's no
accounting for it* sounds like a guilty child who's been told to keep
accounts. And *I just like it* sounds like a person who is hiding
reasons too unworthy to admit. However, we often do have sound practical
reasons for making choices that have no reasons by themselves but have
effects on larger scales.

Recognizability: The legs of a chair work equally well if made square or
round. Then why do we tend to choose our furniture according to
systematic styles or fashions? Because familiar styles make it easier
for us to recognize and classify the things we see. Uniformity: If every
object in a room were interesting in itself, our furniture might occupy
our minds too much. By adopting uniform styles, we protect ourselves
from distractions. Predictability: It makes no difference whether a
single car drives on the left or on the right. But it makes all the
difference when there are many cars! Societies need rules that make no
sense for individuals.

It can save a lot of mental work if one makes each arbitrary choice the
way one did before. The more difficult the decision, the more this
policy can save. The following observation by my associate, Edward
Fredkin, seems important enough to deserve a name:

Fredkin's Paradox: The more equally attractive two alternatives seem,
the harder it can be to choose between them — no matter that, to the
same degree, the choice can only matter less.

No wonder we often can't account for *taste* — if it depends on hidden
rules that we use when ordinary reasons cancel out! I do not mean to say
that fashion, style, and art are all the same — only that they often
share this strategy of using forms that lie beneath the surface of our
thoughts. When should we quit reasoning and take recourse in rules of
style? Only when we're fairly sure that further thought will just waste
time. Perhaps that's why we often feel such a sense of being free from
practicality when we make *aesthetic* choices. Such decisions might seem
more constrained if we were aware of how they're made. And what about
those fleeting hints of guilt we sometimes feel for *just liking* art?
Perhaps they're how our minds remind themselves not to abandon thought
too recklessly.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
