<div class="chapnav">

<span class="prev">Previous: [levels and
classifications](./som-8.10.html)</span><span class="next">Next:
[summaries](./som-9.html)</span><span
class="contents">[Contents](index.html)</span>
<div class="titlebar">

Society of Mind
===============

</div>

</div>

*8.11* layers of societies
--------------------------

According to our concept of memory, the K-lines of each agency grow into
a new society. So, to keep things straight, let's call the original
agents S-agents and call their society the S-society. Given any
S-society, we can imagine building memories for it by constructing a
corresponding K-society for it. When we start making a K-society, we
must link each K-line directly to S-agents, because there are no other
K-lines we can connect them to. Later we can use the more efficient
policy of linking new K-lines to old ones. But this will lead to a
different problem of efficiency: the connections to the original
S-agents will become increasingly remote and indirect. Then everything
will begin to slow down — unless the K-society continues to make at
least some new connections to the original S-society. That would be easy
to arrange, if the K-society grows in the form of a *layer* close to its
S-society. The diagram below suggests such an arrangement.

![](./illus/ch8/8-10.png){.illus}

If arranged this way, the layer pairs could form a curious sort of
computer. As S-agents excite K-agents and vice versa, a sort of
spiraling activity would ensue. Over time, the location of that activity
might tend to drift upward or down and might also tend to spread out;
without some control, the system might soon become chaotic. But it would
be hard to control the system from within, nor would that serve the
purposes of other agencies. However, we can easily imagine how yet
another, third agency could confine and control the K-S system's
activity — by specifying which level-band should remain active and
suppressing all the rest. Indeed, that is precisely the sort of coarse
control that a B-brain might exercise, since it could do all this
without needing to understand the fine details of what is happening
inside the A-brain. The third agency might simply look on and say
impatiently, *This isn't getting anywhere: move up to take a
higher-level view of the situation.* Or it might say, *That looks like
progress, so move farther down and fill in more details.*

Is there any essential difference between the K-and S-societies? Not
really — except that the S-society came first. Indeed, we can imagine an
endless sequence of such societies, in which each new one learns to
exploit the last. Later we'll propose that this is how our minds develop
in infancy — as sequences of layers of societies. Each new layer begins
as a set of K-lines, which starts by learning to exploit whatever skills
have been acquired by the previous layer. Whenever a layer acquires some
useful and substantial skill, it tends to stop learning and changing —
and then yet another new layer can begin to learn to exploit the
capabilities of the last. Each new layer begins as a student, learning
new ways to use what older layers can already do. Then it slows its
learning rate — and starts to serve both as subject and as teacher to
the layers that form afterward.

<div class="footer">

[![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US)\
\
[![](./images/som_book.jpeg){#book}
![](./images/a_logo_17.gif)](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0671657135?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creativeASIN=0671657135&linkCode=xm2&tag=marvinminsky)

</div>
