<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-20.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-22.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[2.1  Rotational Kinetic Energy](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_2.1)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

We consider a rigid body to be made up of a large number of constituent
particles with mass *m*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~, position
![](chap1-Z-G-D-26.gif)~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~, and velocities
![](chap2-Z-G-D-1.gif)~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~, with rigid positional
constraints among them. The kinetic energy is

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-1.gif)

</div>

It turns out that the kinetic energy of a rigid body can be separated
into two pieces: a kinetic energy of translation and a kinetic energy of
rotation. Let's see how this comes about.

The configuration of a rigid body is fully specified given the location
of any point in the body and the orientation of the body. This suggests
that it would be useful to decompose the position vectors for the
constituent particles as the sum of the vector ![](chap2-Z-G-D-2.gif) to
some reference position in the body and the vector
![](chap2-Z-G-D-3.gif)~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~ from the reference
position to the particular constituent element with
index ![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif):

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-2.gif)

</div>

Along paths, the velocities are related by

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-3.gif)

</div>

So in terms of ![](chap2-Z-G-D-4.gif) and
![](chap2-Z-G-D-5.gif)~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~ the kinetic energy is

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-4.gif)

</div>

If we select the reference position in the body to be its *center of
mass*,

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-5.gif)

</div>

where *M* = sum~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~ *m*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif)~ is
the total mass of the body, then

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-6.gif)

</div>

So along paths the relative velocities satisfy

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-7.gif)

</div>

The kinetic energy is then

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-8.gif)

</div>

The kinetic energy is the sum of the kinetic energy of the motion of the
total mass at the center of mass

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-9.gif)

</div>

and the kinetic energy of rotation about the center of mass

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-10.gif)

</div>

Written in terms of appropriate generalized coordinates, the kinetic
energy is a Lagrangian for a free rigid body. If we choose generalized
coordinates so that the center of mass position is entirely specified by
some of them and the orientation is entirely specified by others, then
the Lagrange equations for a free rigid body will decouple into two
groups of equations, one concerned with the motion of the center of mass
and one concerned with the orientation.

Such a separation might occur in other problems, such as a rigid body
moving in a uniform gravitational field, but in general, potential
energies cannot be separated as the kinetic energy separates. So the
motion of the center of mass and the rotational motion are usually
coupled through the potential. Even in these cases, it is usually an
advantage to choose generalized coordinates that separately specify the
position of the center of mass and the orientation.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-20.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-22.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

