<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-69.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-71.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[5.13  Projects](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_5.13)
--------------------------------------------------

**Exercise 5.32.**  **Hierarchical Jacobi coordinates**\
 A Hamiltonian for the *n*-body problem is

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-445.gif)

</div>

with

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-446.gif)

</div>

and

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-447.gif)

</div>

where *x*~*i*~ is the tuple of rectangular coordinates for body *i* and
*p*~*i*~ is the tuple of conjugate linear momenta for body *i*.

The potential energy of the system depends only on the relative
positions of the bodies, so the relative motion decouples from the
center of mass motion. In this problem we explore canonical
transformations that achieve this decoupling.

**a**.  Canonical heliocentric coordinates. The coordinates transform as
follows:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-448.gif)

</div>

where *X* is the center of mass of the system, and

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-449.gif)

</div>

for *i*\>0, the differences of the position of body *i* and the body
with index 0 (which might be the Sun). Find the associated canonical
momenta using an *F*~2~-type generating function. Show that the
potential energy can be written solely in terms of the coordinates for
*i*\>0. Show that the kinetic energy is not in the form of a sum of
squares of momenta divided by mass constants.

**b**.  Jacobi coordinates. The Jacobi coordinates isolate the center of
mass motion, without spoiling the usual diagonal quadratic form of the
kinetic energy. Define *X*~*i*~ to be the center of mass of the bodies
with indices less than or equal to *i*:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-450.gif)

</div>

The Jacobi coordinates are defined by

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-451.gif)

</div>

for 0 \< *i* \< *n*, and

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-452.gif)

</div>

The coordinates *x*'~*i*~ for 0 \< *i*\< *n* are the difference of the
position of body *i* and the center of mass of bodies with lower
indices; the coordinate *x*'~0~ is the center of mass of the system.
Complete the canonical transformation by finding the conjugate momenta
using an *F*~2~-type generating function. Show that the kinetic energy
can still be written in the form

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-453.gif)

</div>

for some constants *m*'~*i*~, and that the potential *V* can be written
solely in terms of the Jacobi coordinates *x*'~*i*~ with indices *i* \>
0.

**c**.  Hierarchical Jacobi coordinates. Define a \`\`body'' as a tuple
of a mass and a rectangular position tuple. An *n*-body \`\`system'' is
a tuple of *n* bodies: (*b*~0~, *b*~1~, `...` , *b*~*n*`-`1~). Define a
\`\`linking'' transformation ![](chap1-Z-G-D-5.gif)~*jk*~ for bodies *j*
and *k* that takes an *n*-body system and returns a new linked system:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-454.gif)

</div>

The bodies in the new system are the same as the bodies in the old
system *b*~*i*~' = *b*~*i*~ except for bodies *j* and *k*:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-455.gif)

</div>

This is a transformation to relative coordinates and center of mass for
bodies *j* and *k*. Extend this transformation to phase space and show
that it preserves the form of the kinetic energy

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-456.gif)

</div>

Show that the transformation to Jacobi coordinates of part **b** is
generated by a composition of linking transformations:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-457.gif)

</div>

Interpret the coordinate transformation produced by such a succession of
linking transformations; why do we call this a \`\`linking''
transformation? What requirement has to be satisfied for a composition
of linking transformations to isolate the center of mass of the system
(make it one of the coordinates)? Taking this constraint into account,
find hierarchical Jacobi coordinates for a system with six bodies,
arranged as two triple systems, each of which is a binary plus a third
body. Verify that one of the coordinates is the center of mass of the
system, and that the kinetic energy remains a sum of squares of the
momenta divided by an appropriate mass constant.

**Exercise 5.33.**  **Symplectic Integration**\
 Consider a system for which the Hamiltonian *H* can be split into two
parts, *H*~0~ and *H*~1~, each of which describes a system that can be
efficiently evolved:

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-458.gif)

</div>

Symplectic integrators construct approximate solutions for the
Hamiltonian *H* from those of *H*~0~ and *H*~1~.

We construct a map of the phase space onto itself in the following way
(see Wisdom [[47](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Wisdom1982})]). Define
![](chap1-Z-G-D-17.gif)~2![](chap1-Z-G-D-15.gif)~(*t*) to be an infinite
sum of Dirac delta functions, with interval 2![](chap1-Z-G-D-15.gif),

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-459.gif)

</div>

with Fourier representation

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-460.gif)

</div>

Recall that a ![](chap1-Z-G-D-17.gif) function has the property that
![](chap1-Z-G-D-2.gif)~`-`*a*~^*a*^ *f* ![](chap1-Z-G-D-17.gif) = *f*(0)
for any positive *a* and continuous real-valued function *f*. It is
fruitful to think of the delta function as a limit of a function
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif)~*h*~ that has the value
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif)~*h*~(*t*) = 1/*h* in the interval `-` *h*/2 \<
*t* \< *h*/2 and zero otherwise. Now consider the mapping Hamiltonian

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-461.gif)

</div>

The evolution of the system between the delta functions is governed
solely by *H*~0~. To understand how the system evolves across the delta
functions think of the delta functions in terms of
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif)~*h*~ as *h* goes to zero. Hamilton's equations
contain terms from *H*~1~ with the factor 1/*h*, which is large, and
terms from *H*~0~ that are independent of *h*. So as *h* goes to zero,
*H*~0~ makes a negligible contribution to the evolution. The evolution
across the delta functions is governed solely by *H*~1~. The evolution
of *H*~*m*~ is obtained by alternately evolving the system according to
the Hamiltonian *H*~0~ for an interval ![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* =
2![](chap1-Z-G-D-15.gif) / ![](chap1-Z-G-D-57.gif) and then evolving the
system according to the Hamiltonian *H*~1~ for the same time interval.
The longer-term evolution of *H*~*m*~ is obtained by iterating this map
of the phase space onto itself. Fill in the details to show this.

In terms of Lie series, the evolution of *H*~*m*~ for one delta function
cycle ![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* is generated by

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-462.gif)

</div>

The evolution of *H*~*m*~ approximates the evolution of *H*. Identify
the noncommuting operator *A* with *L*~*H*~0~~ and *B* with *L*~*H*~1~~.
Use the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff identity
(equation [5.475](book-Z-H-69.html#EQUATION_5.475)) to deduce that the
local truncation error (the error in the state after one step
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t*) is proportional to (![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif)
*t*)^2^. The mapping is a first-order integrator.

By merely changing the phase of the delta functions, we can reduce the
truncation error of the map, and the map becomes a second-order
integrator. Instead of making a map by alternating a full step
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* governed by *H*~0~ with a full step
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* governed by *H*~1~, we can make a map by
evolving the system for a half step ![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* / 2
governed by *H*~0~, then for a full step ![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t*
governed by *H*~1~, and then for another half step
![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t* / 2 governed by *H*~0~. In terms of Lie
series the second-order map is generated by

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-463.gif)

</div>

Confirm that the Hamiltonian governing the evolution of this map is the
same as the one above but with the phase of the delta functions shifted.
Show that the truncation error of one step of this second-order map is
indeed proportional to (![](chap1-Z-G-D-43.gif) *t*)^3^.

Consider the Hénon-Heiles system. We can split the Hamiltonian into two
solvable Hamiltonians in the following way
(Wisdom [[48](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Wisdom1987})]):

<div align="left">

![](chap5-Z-G-464.gif)

</div>

Hamiltonian *H*~0~ is the Hamiltonian of two uncoupled linear
oscillators; Hamiltonian *H*~1~ is a nonlinear coupling. The
trajectories of the systems described by each of these Hamiltonians can
be expressed in closed form. Write programs that implement first-order
and second-order maps for the Hénon-Heiles problem. Examine the
evolution of the energy for both chaotic and quasiperiodic initial
conditions. How does the magnitude of the energy error scale with the
step size; is this consistent with the order of the integrator deduced
above? How does the energy error grow with time? Generate surfaces of
section using the second-order map. Does the map preserve the chaotic or
quasiperiodic character of trajectories?

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-69.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-71.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

