<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-41.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-43.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[3.6  Surfaces of Section](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6)
-----------------------------------------------------------

Computing the evolution of mechanical systems is just the beginning of
understanding the dynamics. Typically, we want to know much more than
the phase space evolution of some particular trajectory. We want to
obtain a qualitative understanding of the motion. We want to know what
sorts of motion are possible, and how one type relates to others. We
want to abstract the essential dynamics from the myriad particular
evolutions that we can calculate. Paradoxically, it turns out that by
throwing away most of the calculated information about a trajectory we
gain essential new information about the character of the trajectory and
its relation to other trajectories.

A remarkable tool that extracts the essence by throwing away information
is a technique called the *surface of section* or *Poincaré
section*.[^22^](#footnote_Temp_264) A surface of section is generated by
looking at successive intersections of a trajectory or a set of
trajectories with a plane in the phase space. Typically, the plane is
spanned by a coordinate axis and the canonically conjugate momentum
axis. We will see that surfaces of section made in this way have nice
properties.

The surface of section technique was put to spectacular use in the 1964
landmark paper [[22](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Henon-Heiles})] by
astronomers Michel Hénon and Carl Heiles. In their numerical
investigations they found that some trajectories are chaotic, whereas
other trajectories are regular. An essential characteristic of the
chaotic motions is that initially nearby trajectories separate
exponentially with time; the separation of regular trajectories is
linear.[^23^](#footnote_Temp_265) They found that these two types of
trajectories are typically clustered in the phase space into regions of
regular motion and regions of chaotic motion.

### [3.6.1  Periodically Driven Systems](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6.1)

For a periodically driven system the surface of section is a
stroboscopic view of the evolution; we consider only the state of the
system at the strobe times, with the period of the strobe equal to the
drive period. We generate a surface of section for a periodically driven
system by computing a number of trajectories and accumulating the
phase-space coordinates of each trajectory whenever the drive passes
through some particular phase. Let *T* be the period of the drive; then,
for each trajectory, the surface of section accumulates the phase-space
points ( *q*(*t*), *p*(*t*) ), ( *q*(*t* + *T*), *p*(*t* + *T*) ), (
*q*(*t* + 2*T*), *p*(*t* + 2*T*) ), and so on (see
figure [3.11](#FIGURE_3.11)). For a system with a single degree of
freedom we can plot the sequence of phase-space points on a *q*, *p*
surface.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-131.gif)

</div>

In the case of the stroboscopic section for the periodically driven
system, the phase of the drive is the same for all section points; thus
each phase-space point in the section, with the known phase of the
drive, may be considered as an initial condition for the rest of the
trajectory. The absolute time of the particular section point does not
affect the subsequent evolution; all that matters is that the phase of
the drive have the value specified for the section. Thus we can think of
the dynamical evolution as generating a map that takes a point in the
phase space and generates a new point on the phase space after evolving
the system for one drive period. This map of the phase space onto itself
is called the *Poincaré map*.

Figure [3.12](#FIGURE_3.12) shows an example Poincaré section for the
driven pendulum. We plot the section points for a number of different
initial conditions. We are immediately presented with a new facet of
dynamical systems. For some initial conditions, the subsequent section
points appear to fill out a set of curves in the section. For other
initial conditions this is not the case: rather, the set of section
points appear scattered over a region of the section. In fact, *all* of
the scattered points in figure [3.12](#FIGURE_3.12) were generated from
a single initial condition. The surface of section suggests that there
are qualitatively different classes of trajectories distinguished by the
dimension of the subspace of the section that they explore.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-132.gif)

</div>

Trajectories that fill out curves on the surface of section are called
*regular* or *quasiperiodic* trajectories. The curves that are filled
out by the regular trajectories are *invariant curves*. They are
invariant in that if any section point for a trajectory falls on an
invariant curve, all subsequent points fall on the same invariant curve.
Otherwise stated, the Poincaré map maps every point on an invariant
curve onto the invariant curve.

The trajectories that appear to fill areas are called *chaotic*
trajectories. For these points the distance in phase space between
initially nearby points grows, on average, exponentially with
time.[^24^](#footnote_Temp_266) In contrast, for the regular
trajectories, the distance in phase space between initially nearby
points grows, on average, linearly with time.

The phase space seems to be grossly clumped into different regions.
Initial conditions in some regions appear to predominantly yield regular
trajectories, and other regions appear to predominantly yield chaotic
trajectories. This gross division of the phase space into qualitatively
different types of trajectories is called the *divided phase space*. We
will see later that there is much more structure here than is apparent
at this scale, and that upon magnification there is a complicated
interweaving of chaotic and regular regions on finer and finer scales.
Indeed, we shall see that many trajectories that appear to generate
curves on the surface of section are, upon magnification, actually
chaotic and fill a tiny area. We shall also find that there are
trajectories that lie on one-dimensional curves on the surface of
section, but only explore a subset of this curve formed by cutting out
an infinite number of holes.[^25^](#footnote_Temp_267)

The features seen on the surface of section of the driven pendulum are
quite general. The same phenomena are seen in most dynamical systems. In
general, there are both regular and chaotic trajectories, and there is
the clumping characteristic of the divided phase space. The specific
details depend upon the system, but the basic phenomena are generic. Of
course, we are interested in both aspects: the phenomena that are common
to all systems, and the specific details for particular systems of
interest.

The surface of section for the periodically driven pendulum has specific
features that give us qualitative information about how this system
behaves. The central island in figure [3.12](#FIGURE_3.12) is the
remnant of the oscillation region for the unforced pendulum (see
figure [3.4](book-Z-H-39.html#FIGURE_3.4) in
section [3.3](book-Z-H-39.html#%_sec_3.3)). There is a sizable region of
regular trajectories here that are, in a sense, similar to the
trajectories of the unforced pendulum. In this region, the pendulum
oscillates back and forth, much as the undriven pendulum does, but the
drive makes it wiggle as it does so. The section points are all
collected at the same phase of the drive so we do not see these wiggles
on the section.

The central island is surrounded by a large chaotic zone. Thus the
region of phase space with regular trajectories similar to the unforced
trajectories has finite extent. On the section, the boundary of this
\`\`stable'' region is apparently rather well defined -- there is a
sudden transition from smooth regular invariant curves to chaotic motion
that can take the system far from this region of regular motion.

There are two other sizeable regions of regular behavior. The
trajectories in these regions are resonant with the drive, on average
executing one full rotation per cycle of the drive. The two islands
differ in the direction of the rotation. In these regions the pendulum
is making complete rotations, but the rotation is locked to the drive so
that points on the section appear only in the islands with finite
angular extent. The fact that points for particular trajectories loop
around the islands means that the pendulum sometimes completes a cycle
faster than the drive and sometimes slower than the drive, but never
loses lock.

Each regular region has finite extent. So from the surface of section we
can see directly the range of initial conditions that remain in
resonance with the drive. Outside of the regular region initial
conditions lead to chaotic trajectories that evolve far from the
resonant regions.

Various higher-order resonance islands are also visible, as are
nonresonant regular circulating orbits. So, the surface of section has
provided us with an overview of the main types of motion that are
possible and their interrelationship.

Changing the parameters shows other interesting phenomena.
Figure [3.13](#FIGURE_3.13) shows the surface of section when the drive
frequency is twice the natural small-amplitude oscillation frequency of
the undriven pendulum. The section has a large chaotic zone, with an
interesting set of islands. The central equilibrium has undergone an
instability and instead of a central island we find two off-center
islands. These islands are alternately visited one after the other. As
the support goes up and down the pendulum alternately tips to one side
and then the other. It takes two periods of the drive before the
pendulum visits the same island. Thus, the system has
\`\`period-doubled.'' An island has been replaced by a period-doubled
pair of islands. Note that other islands still exist. The islands in the
top and bottom of the chaotic zone are the resonant islands, in which
the pendulum loops on average a full turn for every cycle of the drive.
Note that, as before, if the pendulum is rapidly circulating, the motion
is regular.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-133.gif)

</div>

It is a surprising fact that if we shake the support of a pendulum fast
enough then the pendulum can stand upright. This phenomenon can be
visualized with the surface of section. Figure [3.14](#FIGURE_3.14)
shows a surface of section when the drive frequency is large compared to
the natural frequency. The pendulum can stand upright because there is a
regular island at the inverted equilibrium. The surface of section shows
that the pendulum can remain upright for a range of initial
displacements from the vertical.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-134.gif)

</div>

### [3.6.2  Computing Stroboscopic Surfaces of Section](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6.2)

We already have the system derivative for the pendulum, and we can use
it to make a parametric map for constructing Poincaré sections:

`(define (driven-pendulum-map m l g A omega)   (let ((advance (state-advancer H-pend-sysder m l g A omega))         (map-period (/ :2pi omega)))     (lambda (theta ptheta return fail)       (let ((ns (advance                   (up 0 theta ptheta)  ; initial state                   map-period)))        ; integration interval         (return ((principal-value :pi) (coordinate ns))                 (momentum ns)))))) `

A map procedure takes the two section coordinates (here `theta` and
`ptheta`) and two \`\`continuation'' procedures. If the section
coordinates given are in the domain of the map, it produces two new
section coordinates and passes them to the `return` continuation,
otherwise the map procedure calls the `fail` continuation procedure with
no arguments.[^26^](#footnote_Temp_268)

The trajectories of a map can be explored with an \`\`interactive''
interface. The procedure `explore-map` lets us use a pointing device to
choose initial conditions for trajectories. For example, the surface of
section in figure [3.12](#FIGURE_3.12) was generated by plotting a
number of trajectories, using a pointer to choose initial conditions,
with the following program:

`(define win (frame :-pi :pi -20 20)) (let ((m 1.0)                        ;m=1kg       (l 1.0)                        ;l=1m       (g 9.8)                        ;g=9.8m/s2       (A 0.05))                      ;A=1/20m   (let ((omega0 (sqrt (/ g l))))     (let ((omega (* 4.2 omega0)))       (explore-map        win        (driven-pendulum-map m l g A omega)        1000))))                      ;1000 points for each ic `

**Exercise 3.10.**  **Fun with phase portraits**\
 Choose some one-degree-of-freedom dynamical system that you are curious
about and that can be driven with a periodic drive. Construct a map of
the sort we made for the driven pendulum and do some exploring. Are
there chaotic regions? Are all of the chaotic regions connected
together?

### [3.6.3  Autonomous Systems](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6.3)

We illustrated the use of Poincaré sections to visualize qualitative
features of the phase space for a one degree-of-freedom system with
periodic drive, but the idea is more general. Here we show how Hénon and
Heiles [[22](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Henon-Heiles})] used the surface of
section to elucidate the properties of an autonomous system.

#### [Hénon-Heiles background](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_Temp_270)

In the early '60s astronomers were up against a wall. Careful
measurements of the motion of nearby stars in the galaxy had allowed
particular statistical averages of the observed motions to be
determined, and the averages were not at all what was expected. In
particular, what was calculated was the velocity dispersion: the root
mean square deviation of the velocity from the average. We use angle
brackets to denote an average over nearby stars: \< *w* \> is the
average value of some quantity *w* for the stars in the ensemble. The
average velocity is \< ![](chap2-Z-G-D-1.gif) \>. The components of the
velocity dispersion are

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-135.gif)

</div>

If we use cylindrical polar coordinates (*r*, ![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif),
*z*) and align the axes with the galaxy so that *z* is perpendicular to
the galactic plane and *r* increases with the distance to the center of
the galaxy, then two particular components of the velocity dispersion
are

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-136.gif)

</div>

It was expected at the time that these two components of the velocity
dispersion should be equal. In fact they were found to differ by about a
factor of 2: ![](chap3-Z-G-D-5.gif)~*r*~ approx 2
![](chap3-Z-G-D-5.gif)~*z*~. What was the problem? In the literature at
the time there was considerable discussion of what could be wrong. Was
the problem some observational selection effect? Were the velocities
measured incorrectly? Were the assumptions used in the derivation of the
expected ratio not adequately satisfied? For example, the derivation
assumed that the galaxy was approximately axisymmetric. Perhaps
non-axisymmetric components of the galactic potential were at fault. It
turned out that the problem was much deeper. The understanding of motion
was wrong.

Let's review the derivation of the expected relation among the
components of the velocity dispersion. We wish to give a statistical
description of the distribution of stars in the galaxy. We introduce the
phase-space distribution function *f*(![](chap1-Z-G-D-26.gif),
![](chap3-Z-G-D-7.gif)), which gives the probability density of finding
a star at position ![](chap1-Z-G-D-26.gif) with momentum
![](chap3-Z-G-D-7.gif).[^27^](#footnote_Temp_271) Integrating this
density over some finite volume of phase space gives the probability of
finding a star in that phase-space volume (in that region of space
within a specified region of momenta). We assume the probability density
is normalized so that the integral over all of phase space gives unit
probability; the star is somewhere and has some momentum with certainty.
In terms of *f*, the statistical average of any dynamical quantity *w*
over some volume of phase space *V* is just

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-137.gif)

</div>

where the integral extends over the phase-space volume *V*. In computing
the velocity dispersion at some point ![](chap1-Z-G-D-26.gif), we would
compute the averages by integrating over all momenta.

Individual stars move in the gravitational potential of the rest of the
galaxy. It is not unreasonable to assume that the overall distribution
of stars in the galaxy does not change much with time, or changes only
very slowly. The density of stars in the galaxy is actually very small
and close encounters of stars are very rare. Thus, we can model the
gravitational potential of the galaxy as a fixed external potential in
which individual stars move. The galaxy is approximately axisymmetric.
We assume that the deviation from exact axisymmetry is not a significant
effect and thus we take the model potential to be exactly axisymmetric.

Consider the motion of a point mass (a star) in an axisymmetric
potential (of the galaxy). In cylindrical polar coordinates the
Hamiltonian is

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-138.gif)

</div>

where *V* does not depend on ![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif). Since
![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif) does not appear, we know that the conjugate
momentum *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~ is constant. For the motion of any
particular star we can treat *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~ as a
parameter. Thus the effective Hamiltonian has two degrees of freedom:

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-139.gif)

</div>

where

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-140.gif)

</div>

The value *E* of the Hamiltonian is constant since there is no explicit
time dependence in the Hamiltonian. Thus, we have constants of the
motion *E* and *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~.

Jeans's \`\`theorem'' asserts that the distribution function *f* depends
only on the values of the integrals of motion. That is, we can introduce
a different distribution function *f*' that represents the same physical
distribution:

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-141.gif)

</div>

At the time, there was good reason to believe that this might be
correct. First, it is clear that the distribution function surely
depends at least on *E* and *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~. The problem
is, \`\`Given an energy *E* and angular momentum
*p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~, what motion is allowed?'' The integrals
clearly confine the evolution. Does the evolution carry the system
everywhere in the phase space subject to these known constraints? In the
early part of the 20th century this appeared plausible. Statistical
mechanics was successful, and statistical mechanics made exactly this
assumption. Perhaps there are other integrals of the motion that exist,
but that we have not yet discovered? Poincaré proved an important
theorem with regard to integrals of the motion. Poincaré proved that
most integrals of a dynamical system typically do not persist upon
perturbation of the system. That is, if a small perturbation is added to
a problem, then most of the integrals of the original problem do not
have analogs in the perturbed problem. The integrals are destroyed. Of
course, integrals that result from symmetries of the problem continue to
be preserved if the perturbed system has the same symmetries. Thus
angular momentum continues to be preserved upon application of any
axisymmetric perturbation. Poincaré's theorem is correct, but what came
next was not. As a corollary to Poincaré's theorem, in 1920 Fermi
published a proof of an ergodic theorem stating that typically the
motion of perturbed problems is ergodic[^28^](#footnote_Temp_272)
subject to the constraints imposed by the integrals resulting from
symmetries. Loosely speaking, this means that trajectories go everywhere
they are allowed to go by the integral constraints. Fermi's theorem was
later shown to be incorrect, but on the basis of this theorem we could
expect that typically systems fully explore the phase space, subject
only to the constraints imposed by the integrals resulting from
symmetries. Suppose then that the evolution of stars in the galactic
potential is subject only to the constraints of conserving *E* and
*p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~. We shall see that this is not true, but if
it were we could then conclude that the distribution function for stars
in the galaxy can also depend only on *E* and
*p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~.

Given this form of the distribution function, we can deduce the stated
ratios of the velocity dispersions. We note that *p*~*z*~ and *p*~*r*~
appear in the same way in the energy. Thus the average of any function
of *p*~*z*~ computed with the distribution function must equal the
average of the same function of *p*~*r*~. In particular, the velocity
dispersions in the *z* and *r* directions must be equal:

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-142.gif)

</div>

But this is not what was observed, which was

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-143.gif)

</div>

Hénon and Heiles [[22](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Henon-Heiles})] approached
this problem differently from others at the time. Rather than improving
the models for the motion of stars in the galaxy, they concentrated on
what turned out to be the central issue: What is the qualitative nature
of motion? The problem had nothing to do with galactic dynamics in
particular, but with the problem of motion. They abstracted the
dynamical problem from the particulars of galactic dynamics.

#### [The system of Hénon and Heiles](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_Temp_273)

We have seen that the study of the motion of a point with mass *m* and
an axisymmetric potential energy reduces to the study of a reduced
two-degree-of-freedom problem in *r* and *z* with potential energy
*U*(*r*, *z*). Hénon and Heiles chose to study the motion in a
two-degree-of-freedom system with a particularly simple potential energy
so the dynamics would be clear and the calculation uncluttered. The
Hénon-Heiles Hamiltonian is

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-144.gif)

</div>

with potential energy

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-145.gif)

</div>

The potential energy is shaped like a distorted bowl. It has triangular
symmetry, as is evident when it is rewritten in polar coordinates:

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-146.gif)

</div>

Contours of the potential energy are shown in
figure [3.15](#FIGURE_3.15). At small values of the potential energy the
contours are approximately circular; as the value of the potential
energy approaches 1/6 the contours become triangular, and at larger
potential energies the contours open to infinity.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-147.gif)

</div>

The Hamiltonian is independent of time, so energy is conserved. In this
case this is the only known integral. We first determine the
restrictions that conservation of energy imposes on the evolution. We
have

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-148.gif)

</div>

so the motion is confined to the region inside the contour *V* = *E*
because the sum of the squares of the momenta cannot be negative.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-149.gif)

</div>

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-150.gif)

</div>

Let's compute some sample trajectories. For definiteness, we investigate
trajectories with energy *E* = 1/8. There are a large variety of
trajectories. There are trajectories that circulate in a regular way
around the bowl, and there are trajectories that oscillate back and
forth (figure [3.16](#FIGURE_3.16)). There are also trajectories that
appear more irregular (figure [3.17](#FIGURE_3.17)). There is no end to
the trajectories that could be computed, but let's face it, surely there
is more to life than looking at trajectories.

The problem facing Hénon and Heiles was the issue of integrals of
motion. Are there other integrals besides the obvious ones? They
investigated this issue with the surface of section technique. The
surface of section is generated by looking at successive passages of
trajectories through a plane in phase space. How does this address the
issue of the number of integrals? A priori, there appear to be two
possibilities: either there are hidden integrals or there are not.
Suppose there is no other integral of the motion besides the energy.
Then the expectation was that successive intersections of the trajectory
with the section plane would eventually explore all of the section plane
that is consistent with conservation of energy. On the other hand, if
there is a hidden integral then the successive intersections would be
constrained to fall on a curve.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-151.gif)

</div>

Specifically, the surface of section is generated by recording and
plotting *p*~*y*~ versus *y* whenever *x* = 0, as shown in
figure [3.18](#FIGURE_3.18). Given the value of the energy *E* and a
point ( *y*, *p*~*y*~ ) on the section *x* = 0, we can recover *p*~*x*~,
up to a sign. If we restrict attention to intersections with the section
plane that cross with, say, positive *p*~*x*~, then there is a
one-to-one relation between section points and trajectories. A section
point thus corresponds to a unique trajectory.

#### [Interpretation](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_Temp_274)

On the section, the energy is

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-152.gif)

</div>

Because *p*~*x*~^2^ is positive, the trajectory is confined by the
energy integral to regions of the section such that

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-153.gif)

</div>

So, if there is no other integral, we might expect the points on the
section eventually to fill the area enclosed by this bounding curve.

On the other hand, suppose there is a hidden extra integral *I*(*x*,
*y*; *p*~*x*~, *p*~*y*~) = 0. Then this integral would provide further
constraints on the trajectories and their intersections with the section
plane. An extra integral *I* provides a constraint among the four
phase-space variables *x*, *y*, *p*~*x*~, and *p*~*y*~. We can use *E*
to solve for *p*~*x*~, so for a given *E* the integral *I* gives a
relation among *x*, *y*, and *p*~*y*~. Using the fact that on the
section *x* = 0, the integral gives a relation between *y* and *p*~*y*~
on the section for a given *E*. So we expect that if there is another
integral the successive intersections of a trajectory with the section
plane will fall on a curve.

If there is no extra integral we expect the section points to fill an
area; if there is an extra integral we expect the section points to be
restricted to a curve. What actually happens?
Figure [3.19](#FIGURE_3.19) shows a surface of section for *E* = 1/12;
the section points for several representative trajectories are
displayed. By and large, the points appear to be restricted to curves,
so there appears to be evidence for an extra integral. Look closely
though. Where the \`\`curves'' cross, the lines are a little fuzzy.
Hmmm.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-154.gif)

</div>

Let's try a little larger energy, *E* = 1/8. The appearance of the
section changes qualitatively (figure [3.20](#FIGURE_3.20)). For some
trajectories there still appear to be extra constraints on the motion.
But other trajectories appear to fill an area of the section plane,
pretty much as we expected of trajectories if there was no extra
integral. In particular, all of the scattered points on this section
were generated by a single trajectory. Thus, some trajectories behave as
if there is an extra integral, and others don't. Wow!

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-155.gif)

</div>

Let's go on to a higher energy, *E* = 1/6, just at the escape energy. A
section for this energy is shown in figure [3.21](#FIGURE_3.21). Now, a
single trajectory explores most of the region of the section plane
allowed by energy conservation, but not entirely. There are still
trajectories that appear to be subject to extra constraints.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-156.gif)

</div>

We seem to have all possible worlds. At low energy, the system by and
large behaves as if there is an extra integral, but not entirely. At
intermediate energy, the phase space is divided: some trajectories
explore areas whereas others are constrained. At high energy,
trajectories explore most of the energy surface; few trajectories show
extra constraints. We have just witnessed our first transition to chaos.

Two qualitatively different types of motion are revealed by this surface
of section, just as we saw in the Poincaré sections for the driven
pendulum. There are trajectories that seem to be constrained as if by an
extra integral. And there are trajectories that explore an area on the
section as though there were no extra integrals. Regular trajectories
appear to be constrained by an extra integral to a one-dimensional set
on the section; chaotic trajectories are not constrained in this way and
explore an area.[^29^](#footnote_Temp_275)

The surface of section not only reveals the existence of qualitatively
different types of motion, but also provides an overview of the
different types of trajectories. Take the surface of section for *E* =
1/8 (figure [3.20](#FIGURE_3.20)). There are four main islands, engulfed
in a chaotic sea. The particular trajectories displayed above provide
examples from different parts of the section. The trajectory that loops
around the bowl (figure [3.16](#FIGURE_3.16)) belongs to the large
island on the left side of the section. Similar trajectories that loop
around the bowl in the other direction belong to the large island on the
right side of the section. The trajectories that oscillate back and
forth across the bowl belong to the two islands above and below the
center of the section. (By symmetry there should be three such islands.
The third island is snugly wrapped against the boundary of the section.)
Each of the main islands is surrounded by a chain of secondary islands.
We will see that the types of orbits are inexhaustible, if we look
closely enough. The chaotic trajectory (figure [3.17](#FIGURE_3.17))
lives in the chaotic sea. Thus the section provides a summary of the
types of motion possible and how they are related to one another. It is
much more useful than plots of a zillion trajectories.

The section for a particular energy summarizes the dynamics at that
energy. A sequence of sections for various energies shows how the major
features change with the energy. We have already noticed that at low
energy the section is dominated by regular orbits, at intermediate
energy the section is divided more or less equally into regular and
chaotic regions, and at high energies the section is dominated by a
single chaotic zone. We will see that such transitions from regular to
chaotic behavior are quite common; similar phenomena occur in widely
different systems, though the details naturally depend on the system
under study.

### [3.6.4  Computing Hénon-Heiles Surfaces of Section](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6.4)

The following procedure is an implementation of the Poincaré map for the
Hénon-Heiles system:

`(define (HHmap E)   (let ((advancer          (state-advancer           (phase-space-derivative HHHam))))     (lambda (y py cont fail)       (define (find-next-crossing s)         (let lp ((s s))           (let ((ns (advancer s .1 1.e-12)))             (if (and (> (ref (coordinate ns) 0) 0)                      (< (ref (coordinate s) 0) 0))                 (refine-crossing s)                 (lp ns)))))       (define (refine-crossing s)         (let ((dt (- (/ (ref (coordinate s) 0)                          (ref (momentum s) 0)))))           (let ((ns (advancer s dt 1.e-12)))             (if (< (abs (ref (coordinate s) 0))                    1.e-10)                 ;; return new section point                 (cont (ref (coordinate ns) 1)                        (ref (momentum ns) 1))                 ;; continue refining                 (refine-crossing ns)))))       (let ((initial-state (section->state E y py)))         (if (not initial-state)             (fail)             (find-next-crossing initial-state)))))) `

The system derivative is computed directly as the phase-space derivative
of the Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian procedure for the Hénon-Heiles
problem is

`(define (HHHam s)   (+ (* 1/2 (square (momentum s)))      (HHpotential s))) `

with the potential energy

`(define (HHpotential s)   (let ((x (ref (coordinate s) 0))         (y (ref (coordinate s) 1)))     (+ (* 1/2 (+ (square x) (square y)))        (- (* (square x) y) (* 1/3 (cube y)))))) `

For each initial point (*y*, *p*~*y*~) on the surface of section, the
map first finds the initial state that has the specified energy, if one
exists. The procedure `section->state` handles this task:

`(define (section->state E y py)   (let ((d (- E (+ (HHpotential (up 0 (up 0 y)))                    (* 1/2 (square py))))))     (if (>= d 0.)         (let ((px (sqrt (* 2 d))))           (up 0 (up 0 y) (down px py)))         #f))) `

The procedure `section->state` returns `#f` (false) if there is no state
consistent with the specified energy.

The initial state is then advanced by the internal procedure
`find-next-crossing` until successive states are on opposite sides of
the section plane. After finding states that straddle the section plane
the crossing is refined by Newton's method, as implemented by the
internal procedure `refine-crossing`.

To explore the Hénon-Heiles map we use `explore-map` as before:

`(define win (frame -.5 .7 -.6 .6)) (explore-map win (HHmap 0.125) 500) `

### [3.6.5  Non-Axisymmetric Top](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.6.5)

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-157.gif)

</div>

We have seen that the motion of an axisymmetric top can be essentially
solved. A plot of the rate of change of the tilt angle versus the tilt
angle is a simple closed curve. The evolution of the other angles
describing the configuration can be obtained by quadrature once the
tilting motion has been solved. Now let's consider a non-axisymmetric
top. A non-axisymmetric top is a top with three unequal moments of
inertia. The pivot is not at the center of mass, so uniform gravity
exerts a torque. We assume the line between the pivot and the center of
mass is one of the principal axes, which we take to be
![](chap2-Z-G-D-14.gif). There are no torques about the vertical axis,
so the vertical component of the angular momentum is conserved. If we
write the Hamiltonian in terms of the Euler angles, the angle
![](chap1-Z-G-D-16.gif), which corresponds to rotation about the
vertical, does not appear. Thus the momentum conjugate to this angle is
conserved. The nontrivial degrees of freedom are ![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)
and ![](chap1-Z-G-D-56.gif), with their conjugate momenta.

We can make a surface of section (see figure [3.22](#FIGURE_3.22)) for
this problem by displaying *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif)~ versus
![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif) when ![](chap1-Z-G-D-56.gif) = 0. There are in
general two values of *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-56.gif)~ possible for given
values of energy and *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-16.gif)~. We plot points only
if the value of *p*~![](chap1-Z-G-D-56.gif)~ at the crossing is the
larger of the two possibilities. This makes the points of the section
correspond uniquely to a trajectory.

In this section there is a large quasiperiodic island surrounding a
fixed point that corresponds to the tilted equilibrium point of the
awake axisymmetric top (see figure [3.7](book-Z-H-40.html#FIGURE_3.7) in
section [3.4](book-Z-H-40.html#%_sec_3.4)). Surrounding this is a large
chaotic zone that extends from ![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif) = 0 to angles
near ![](chap1-Z-G-D-15.gif). If this top is placed initially near the
vertical, it exhibits chaotic motion that carries it to large tilt
angles. If the top is started within the quasiperiodic island, the tilt
is stable.

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^22^](#call_footnote_Temp_264) The surface of section technique was
introduced by Poincaré in his *Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique
Céleste* [[35](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Poincare})]. Poincaré proved
remarkable results about dynamical systems using the surface of section
technique, and we shall return to these later. The surface of section
technique is a key tool in the modern study of dynamical systems, for
both analytical and numerical investigations.

[^23^](#call_footnote_Temp_265) That solutions of ordinary differential
equations can show exponential sensitivity to initial conditions was
independently discovered by Edward
Lorenz [[31](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Lorenz})] in the context of a
simplified model of convection in the Earth's atmosphere. Lorenz coined
the picturesque term \`\`butterfly effect'' to describe this
sensitivity: his weather system model is so sensitive to initial
conditions that \`\`the flapping of a butterfly's wings in Brazil can
change the course of a typhoon in Japan.''

[^24^](#call_footnote_Temp_266) We saw an example of this extreme
sensitivity to initial conditions in
figure [1.7](book-Z-H-14.html#FIGURE_1.7)
(section [1.7](book-Z-H-14.html#%_sec_1.7)).

[^25^](#call_footnote_Temp_267) One-dimensional invariant sets with an
infinite number of holes are sometimes called *cantori*, by analogy to
the Cantor sets, but it really doesn't Mather.

[^26^](#call_footnote_Temp_268) In the particular case of the driven
pendulum there is no reason to call `fail`. This contingency is reserved
for systems where orbits escape or cease to satisfy some constraint.

[^27^](#call_footnote_Temp_271) We will see that it is convenient to
look at distribution functions in the phase-space coordinates because
the consequences of conserved momenta are more apparent, and also
because volume in phase space is conserved by evolution (see
section [3.8](book-Z-H-44.html#%_sec_3.8)).

[^28^](#call_footnote_Temp_272) A system is ergodic if time averages
along trajectories are the same as phase-space averages over the region
explored by the trajectories.

[^29^](#call_footnote_Temp_275) As before, upon close examination we may
find that trajectories that appear to be confined to a curve on the
section are chaotic trajectories that explore a highly confined region.
It is known, however, that some trajectories really are confined to
curves on the section. Trajectories that start on these curves remain on
these curves forever, and they fill these curves densely. These
invariant curves are preserved by the dynamical evolution. There are
also invariant subsets of curves with an infinite number of holes.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-41.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-43.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

