<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-75.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-77.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[6.5  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_6.5)
-----------------------------------------------

The goal of perturbation theory is to relate aspects of the motions of a
given system to those of a nearby solvable system. Perturbation theory
can be used to predict features such as the size and location of the
resonance islands and chaotic zones.

With perturbation analysis we obtain an approximation to the evolution
of a system by relating the evolution of the system to that of a
different system that, when approximated, can be exactly solved. We can
carry this exact solution of the approximate problem back to the
original system to obtain an approximate solution of our original
problem. The strategy of canonical perturbation theory is to make
canonical transformations that eliminate terms in the Hamiltonian that
impede solution. Formulation of perturbation theory in terms of Lie
series is especially convenient.

We can use first-order perturbation theory to analyze the motion of the
undriven pendulum as a free rotor to which gravity is added. In this
analysis we find that a small denominator in the series limits the range
of applicability of the perturbative solution to regions that are away
from the resonant oscillation region.

In higher-order perturbation theory for the pendulum we discover the
problem of secular terms, terms that produce error that grow with time.
The appearance of secular terms can be avoided by keeping track of how
the frequencies change as perturbations are included. In canonical
perturbation theory secular terms can be avoided by associating the
average part of the perturbation with the solvable part of the
Hamiltonian.

In carrying out canonical perturbation theory in higher dimensions we
find that the problem of small denominators is more serious. Small
denominators arise near every commensurability, and commensurabilities
are common. Small denominators can be locally avoided near particular
commensurabilities by incorporating the offending terms into the
solvable part of the Hamiltonian. If the resonances are isolated, the
resulting resonance Hamiltonian is still solvable. In many cases the
resonance Hamiltonian is well approximated by a pendulum-like
Hamiltonian. A global picture can be constructed by stitching together
the solutions for each resonance region constructed separately.

If two resonance regions overlap -- that is, if the sum of the
half-widths of the resonance regions exceeds their separation -- then
large-scale chaos ensues. The chaotic regions associated with the
separatrices of the overlapping resonances become connected. When the
resonances are well approximated by pendulum-like resonances a simple
analytic criterion for the appearance of large-scale chaos can be
developed.

Higher-order perturbative descriptions can be developed to describe
islands that do not correspond to particular terms in the Hamiltonian,
secondary resonances, bifurcations, and so on. The theory can be
extended to describe as much detail as one wishes.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-75.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-77.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

