<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-38.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-40.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[3.3  One Degree of Freedom](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.3)
-------------------------------------------------------------

The solutions of time-independent systems with one degree of freedom can
be found by quadrature. Such systems conserve the Hamiltonian: the
Hamiltonian has a constant value on each realizable trajectory. We can
use this constraint to eliminate the momentum in favor of the
coordinate. Thus Hamilton's equations reduce to a single equation
*Dq*(*t*) = *f*(*q*(*t*)). The solution *q* can be expressed as a
definite integral.

A geometric view reveals more structure. Time-independent systems with
one degree of freedom have a two-dimensional phase space. Energy is
conserved, so all orbits are level curves of the Hamiltonian. The
possible orbit types are restricted to curves that are contours of a
real-valued function. The possible orbits are paths of constant altitude
in the mountain range on the phase plane described by the Hamiltonian.

Only a few characteristic features are possible. There are points that
are stable equilibria of the dynamical system. These are the peaks and
pits of the Hamiltonian mountain range. These equilibria are stable in
the sense that neighboring trajectories on nearby contours stay close to
the equilibrium point. There are orbits that trace simple closed curves
on contours that surround a peak or pit, or perhaps several peaks. There
are also trajectories lying on contours that cross at a saddle point.
The crossing point is an unstable equilibrium, unstable in the sense
that neighboring trajectories leave the vicinity of the equilibrium
point. Such contours that cross at saddle points are called
*separatrices* (singular: *separatrix*), contours that \`\`separate''
two regions of distinct behavior.

At every point Hamilton's equations give a unique rate of evolution and
direct the system to move perpendicular to the gradient of the
Hamiltonian. At the peaks, pits, and saddle points, the gradient of the
Hamiltonian is zero, so according to Hamilton's equations these are
equilibria. At other points, the gradient of the Hamiltonian is nonzero,
so according to Hamilton's equations the rate of evolution is nonzero.
Trajectories evolve along the contours of the Hamiltonian. Trajectories
on simple closed contours periodically trace the contour. At a saddle
point, contours cross. The gradient of the Hamiltonian is zero at the
saddle point, so a system started at the saddle point does not leave the
saddle point. On the separatrix away from the saddle point the gradient
of the Hamiltonian is not zero, so trajectories evolve along the
contour. Trajectories on the separatrix are asymptotic forward or
backward in time to a saddle point. Going forward or backward in time,
such trajectories forever approach an unstable equilibrium but never
reach it. If the phase space is bounded, asymptotic trajectories that
lie on contours of a smooth Hamiltonian are always asymptotic to
unstable equilibria at both ends (but they may be different equilibria).

These orbit types are all illustrated by the prototypical phase plane of
the pendulum (see figure [3.4](#FIGURE_3.4)). The solutions lie on
contours of the Hamiltonian. There are three regions of the phase plane;
in each the motion is qualitatively different. In the central region the
pendulum oscillates; above this there is a region in which the pendulum
circulates in one direction; below the oscillation region the pendulum
circulates in the other direction. In the center of the oscillation
region there is a stable equilibrium, at which the pendulum is hanging
motionless. At the boundaries between these regions, the pendulum is
asymptotic to the unstable equilibrium, at which the pendulum is
standing upright.[^18^](#footnote_Temp_256) There are two asymptotic
trajectories, corresponding to the two ways the equilibrium can be
approached. Each of these is also asymptotic to the unstable equilibrium
going backward in time.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-101.gif)

</div>

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^18^](#call_footnote_Temp_256) The pendulum has only one unstable
equilibrium. Remember that the coordinate is an angle.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-38.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-40.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

