<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-21.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-23.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[2.2  Kinematics of Rotation](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_2.2)
--------------------------------------------------------------

The motion of a rigid body about a center of rotation, a reference
position that is fixed with respect to the body, is characterized at
each moment by a rotation axis and a rate of rotation. Let's elaborate.

We can get from any orientation of a body to any other orientation of
the body by a rotation of the body. That this is true is called Euler's
theorem on rotations about a point.[^2^](#footnote_Temp_176) We know
that rotations have the property that they do not commute: the
composition of successive rotations in general depends on the order of
operation. Rotating a book about the ![](chap2-Z-G-D-6.gif) axis and
then about the ![](chap2-Z-G-D-7.gif) axis puts the book in a different
orientation than rotating the book about the ![](chap2-Z-G-D-7.gif) axis
and then about the ![](chap2-Z-G-D-6.gif) axis. Nevertheless, Euler's
theorem states that however many rotations have been composed to reach a
given orientation, the orientation could have been reached with a single
rotation. Try it! We take a book, rotate it this way, then that, and
then some other way -- then find the rotation that does the job in one
step. So a rotation can be specified by an axis of rotation and the
angular amount of the rotation.

If the orientation of a body evolves over some interval of time, then
the orientation at the beginning and the end of the interval can be
connected by a single rotation. In the limit that the duration of the
interval goes to zero the rotation axis approaches a unique
instantaneous rotation axis. And in this limit the ratio of the angle of
rotation and the duration of the interval approaches the instantaneous
rate of rotation. We represent this instantaneous rotational motion by
the *angular velocity vector* ![](chap2-Z-G-D-8.gif), which points in
the direction of the rotation axis (with the right-hand rule giving the
direction of rotation about the axis) and has a magnitude equal to the
rate of rotation.

If the angular velocity vector for a body is ![](chap2-Z-G-D-8.gif) then
the velocities of the constituent particles are perpendicular to the
vectors to the constituent particles and proportional to the rate of
rotation of the body and the distance of the constituent particle from
the instantaneous rotation axis:

<div align="left">

![](chap2-Z-G-11.gif)

</div>

Isn't it interesting that we have found a concise way of specifying how
the orientation of the body is changing, even though we have not yet
described a way to specify the orientation itself?

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^2^](#call_footnote_Temp_176) For an elementary geometric proof see
Whittaker [[46](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Whittaker})], p. 2.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-21.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-23.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

