<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-48.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-50.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[4.1  Emergence of the Divided Phase Space](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_4.1)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

We can get some insight into these qualitative changes of behavior by
considering systems in which the additional effects are turned on by
varying a parameter. For some value of the parameter the system has
enough conserved quantities to be reducible to quadratures; as we vary
the parameter away from this value we can study how the divided phase
space appears. The driven pendulum offers an archetypal example of such
a system. If the amplitude of the drive is zero, then solutions of the
driven pendulum are the same as the solutions of the undriven pendulum.
We have seen surfaces of section for the strongly driven pendulum,
illustrating the divided phase space. Here we crank up the drive slowly
and study how the phase portrait changes.

The motion of the driven pendulum with zero-amplitude drive is the same
as that of an undriven pendulum. The motion of a pendulum was described
in section [3.3](book-Z-H-39.html#%_sec_3.3). Energy is conserved, so
all orbits are level curves of the Hamiltonian in the phase plane (see
figure [4.1](#FIGURE_4.1)). There are three regions of the phase plane
that have qualitatively different types of motion: the region in which
the pendulum oscillates, the region in which the pendulum circulates in
one direction, and the region of circulation in the other direction. In
the center of the oscillation region there is a stable equilibrium, at
which the pendulum is hanging motionless. At the boundaries between
these regions the pendulum is asymptotic to the unstable equilibrium, at
which the pendulum is standing upright. There are two asymptotic
trajectories, corresponding to the two ways the equilibrium can be
approached. Each of these is also asymptotic to the unstable equilibrium
going backward in time.

<div align="left">

![](chap4-Z-G-1.gif)

</div>

#### [Driven pendulum sections with zero drive](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_Temp_295)

Now consider the periodically driven pendulum, but with zero-amplitude
drive. The state of the driven pendulum is specified by an angle
coordinate, its conjugate momentum, and the phase of the periodic drive.
With zero-amplitude drive the evolution of the \`\`driven'' pendulum is
the same as the undriven pendulum. The phase of the drive does not
affect the evolution, but we consider the phase of the drive as part of
the state so we can give a uniform description that allows us to include
the zero-amplitude drive case with the nonzero-amplitude case.

For the driven pendulum we make stroboscopic surfaces of section by
sampling the state at the drive period and plotting the angular momentum
versus the angle (see figure [4.2](#FIGURE_4.2)). For zero-amplitude
drive, the section points are confined to the curves traced by
trajectories of the undriven pendulum. For each kind of orbit that we
saw in the one-degree-of-freedom problem, there are orbits of the driven
pendulum that generate a corresponding pattern of points on the section.

<div align="left">

![](chap4-Z-G-2.gif)

</div>

The two stationary orbits at the equilibrium points of the pendulum
appear as points on the surface of section. Equilibrium points are fixed
points of the Poincaré map.

Section points for the oscillating orbits of the pendulum fall on the
corresponding contour of the Hamiltonian. Section points for the
circulating orbits of the pendulum are likewise confined to the
corresponding contour of the Hamiltonian. We notice that the appearance
of the points generated by orbits on different contours is different.
Typically, if we collected more points on the surface of section the
points would eventually fill in the contours. However, there are
actually two possibilities. Remember that the period of the pendulum is
different for different trajectories. If the period of the pendulum is
commensurate with the period of the drive, then only a finite number of
points will appear on the section. Two periods are commensurate if one
is a rational multiple of the other. If the two periods are
incommensurate then the section points never repeat. In fact, the points
fill the contour densely, coming arbitrarily close to every point on the
contour.

Section points for the asymptotic trajectories of the pendulum fall on
the contour of the Hamiltonian containing the saddle point. Each
asymptotic orbit generates a sequence of isolated points that accumulate
near the fixed point. No individual orbit fills the separatrix on the
section.

<div align="left">

![](chap4-Z-G-3.gif)

</div>

#### [Driven pendulum sections for small drive](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_Temp_296)

Now consider the surface of section for small-amplitude drive (see
figure [4.3](#FIGURE_4.3)). The amplitude of the drive is *A* = 0.001 m;
the drive frequency is 4.2 ![](chap1-Z-G-D-23.gif)~0~, where
![](chap1-Z-G-D-23.gif)~0~ = (*g*/*l*)^1/2^. The overall appearance of
the surface of section is similar to the section with zero-amplitude
drive. Many orbits appear to lie on invariant curves similar to the
invariant curves of the zero-drive case. However, there are several new
features.

There are now resonance regions that correspond to the pendulum rotating
in lock with the drive. These features are found in the upper and lower
circulating region of the surface of section. Each island has a fixed
point for which the pendulum rotates exactly once per cycle of the
drive. In general, fixed points on the surface of section correspond to
periodic motions of the system in the full phase space. The fixed point
is at ± ![](chap1-Z-G-D-15.gif), indicating that the pendulum is
vertical at the section phase of the drive. For orbits in the resonance
region away from the fixed point the points on the section apparently
generate curves that surround the fixed point.[^1^](#footnote_Temp_297)
For these orbits the pendulum rotates on average once per drive, but the
phase of the pendulum is sometimes ahead of the drive and sometimes
behind it.

There are other islands that appear with nonzero-amplitude drive. In the
central oscillation region there is a sixfold chain of secondary
islands. For this orbit the pendulum is oscillating, and the period of
the oscillation is commensurate with the drive. The six islands are all
generated by a single orbit. In fact, the islands are visited
successively in a clockwise direction. After six cycles of the drive the
section point returns to the same island but falls at a different point
on the island curve, accumulating the island curve after many
iterations. The motion of the pendulum is not periodic, but is locked in
a resonance so that on average it oscillates once for every six cycles
of the drive.

Another feature that appears is a narrow chaotic region near where the
separatrix was in the zero-amplitude drive pendulum. We find that
chaotic behavior typically makes its most prominent appearance near
separatrices. This is not surprising because the difference in
velocities that distinguish whether the pendulum rotates or oscillates
is small for orbits near the separatrix. As the pendulum approaches the
top, whether it receives the extra nudge it needs to go over the top
depends on the phase of the drive.

Actually, the apparent separatrices of the resonance islands for which
the pendulum period is equal to the drive period are each generated by a
chaotic orbit. To see that this orbit appears to occupy an area one
would have to magnify the picture by about a factor of 10^4^.

As the drive amplitude is increased the main qualitative changes are the
appearance of resonance islands and chaotic zones. Some qualitative
characteristics of the zero case remain. For instance, many orbits
appear to lie on invariant curves. This behavior is not peculiar to the
driven pendulum; similar features quite generally arise as additional
effects are added to problems that are reducible to quadratures. This
chapter is devoted to understanding in greater detail how these generic
features arise.

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^1^](#call_footnote_Temp_297) Keep in mind that the abscissa is an
angle.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-48.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-50.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

