<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-33.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-35.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[2.14  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_2.14)
-------------------------------------------------

A rigid body is an example of a mechanical system with constraints.
Thus, in a sense this chapter on rigid bodies was nothing but an
extended example of the application of the ideas developed in the first
chapter. The equations of motion are just the Lagrange equations.

The kinetic energy for a rigid body separates into a translational
kinetic energy and a rotational kinetic energy. The center of mass plays
a special role in this separation. The rotational kinetic energy is
simply expressed in terms of the inertia tensor and the angular velocity
vector. We developed the expressions for the kinetic energy that take
into account the body constraints, and we expressed the remaining
degrees of freedom in terms of suitable generalized coordinates.

The vector angular momentum is conserved if there are no external
torques. The time derivative of the body components of the angular
momentum can be written entirely in terms of the body components of the
angular momentum, and the three principal moments of inertia. The body
components of angular momentum form a self-contained dynamical
subsystem.

One choice for generalized coordinates is the Euler angles. They form
suitable generalized coordinates, but are otherwise not special or well
motivated. The Lagrange equations for the Euler angles are singular for
some Euler angles. Other choices of generalized coordinates like the
Euler angles have similar problems. Equations of motion for the
orientation vector are nonsingular.

In general the potential energy depends on the details of the mass
distribution, and does not separate as the kinetic energy separated into
center of mass and relative contributions.

For an axisymmetric top with uniform gravitational acceleration, the
potential energy is exactly the potential energy due to elevation of the
center of mass. Aspects of the motion of the top are deduced from the
conserved quantities. Euler angles are just the right thing for this
problem.

For other problems, such as the rotational motion of an out-of-round
satellite near a planet, the potential energy cannot be written in
finite terms, and judicious approximations must be made. The essential
character of such diverse systems as the rotation of the Moon, Hyperion,
and Mercury are captured by a simple model problem.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-33.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-35.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

