<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-8.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-10.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[1.2  Configuration Spaces](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_1.2)
------------------------------------------------------------

Let us consider mechanical systems that can be thought of as composed of
constituent point particles, with mass and position, but with no
internal structure.[^17^](#footnote_Temp_27) Extended bodies may be
thought of as composed of a large number of these constituent particles
with specific spatial relationships among them. Extended bodies maintain
their shape because of spatial constraints among the constituent
particles. Specifying the position of all the constituent particles of a
system specifies the *configuration* of the system. The existence of
constraints among parts of the system, such as those that determine the
shape of an extended body, means that the constituent particles cannot
assume all possible positions. The set of all configurations of the
system that can be assumed is called the *configuration space* of the
system. The *dimension* of the configuration space is the smallest
number of parameters that have to be given to completely specify a
configuration. The dimension of the configuration space is also called
the number of *degrees of freedom* of the
system.[^18^](#footnote_Temp_28)

For a single unconstrained particle it takes three parameters to specify
the configuration. A point particle has a three-dimensional
configuration space. If we are dealing with a system with more than one
point particle, the configuration space is more complicated. If there
are *k* separate particles we need 3*k* parameters to describe the
possible configurations. If there are constraints among the parts of a
system the configuration is restricted to a lower-dimensional space. For
example, a system consisting of two point particles constrained to move
in three dimensions so that the distance between the particles remains
fixed has a five-dimensional configuration space: thus with three
numbers we can fix the position of one particle, and with two others we
can give the position of the other particle relative to the first.

Consider a juggling pin. The configuration of the pin is specified if we
give the positions of the atoms making up the pin. However, there exist
more economical descriptions of the configuration. In the idealization
that the juggling pin is truly rigid, the distances among all the atoms
of the pin remain constant. So we can specify the configuration of the
pin by giving the position of a single atom and the orientation of the
pin. Using the constraints, the positions of all the other constituents
of the pin can be determined from this information. The dimension of the
configuration space of the juggling pin is six: the minimum number of
parameters that specify the position in space is three, and the minimum
number of parameters that specify an orientation is also three.

As a system evolves with time, the constituent particles move subject to
the constraints. The motion of each constituent particle is specified by
describing the changing configuration. Thus, the motion of the system
may be described as evolving along a path in configuration space. The
configuration path may be specified by a function, the
configuration-path function, which gives the configuration of the system
at any time.

**Exercise 1.2.**  **Degrees of freedom**\
 For each of the mechanical systems described below, give the number of
degrees of freedom of the configuration space.

**a**.  Three juggling pins.

**b**.  A spherical pendulum, consisting of a point mass hanging from a
rigid massless rod attached to a fixed support point. The pendulum bob
may move in any direction subject to the constraint imposed by the rigid
rod. The point mass is subject to the uniform force of gravity.

**c**.  A spherical double pendulum, consisting of one point mass
hanging from a rigid massless rod attached to a second point mass
hanging from a second massless rod attached to a fixed support point.
The point mass is subject to the uniform force of gravity.

**d**.  A point mass sliding without friction on a rigid curved wire.

**e**.  A top consisting of a rigid axisymmetric body with one point on
the symmetry axis of the body attached to a fixed support, subject to a
uniform gravitational force.

**f**.  The same as **e**, but not axisymmetric.

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^17^](#call_footnote_Temp_27) We often refer to a point particle with
mass but no internal structure as a *point mass*.

[^18^](#call_footnote_Temp_28) Strictly speaking, the dimension of the
configuration space and the number of degrees of freedom are not the
same. The number of degrees of freedom is the dimension of the space of
configurations that are \`\`locally accessible.'' For systems with
integrable constraints the two are the same. For systems with
non-integrable constraints the configuration dimension can be larger
than the number of degrees of freedom. For further explanation see the
discussion of systems with non-integrable constraints in
section [1.10.3](book-Z-H-17.html#%_sec_1.10.3). Apart from that
discussion, all of the systems we consider have integrable constraints
(they are \`\`holonomic''). This is why we have chosen to blur the
distinction between the number of degrees of freedom and the dimension
of the configuration space.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-8.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-10.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

