<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-17.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-19.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[1.11  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_1.11)
-------------------------------------------------

To analyze a mechanical system we construct an action function that
gives us a way to distinguish realizable motions from other conceivable
motions of the system. The action function is constructed so as to be
stationary only on paths describing realizable motions, with respect to
variations of the path. This is called the principle of stationary
action. The principle of stationary action is a coordinate-independent
specification of the realizable paths. For systems with or without
constraints we may choose any system of coordinates that uniquely
determines the configuration of the system.

For a large variety of mechanical systems actions are integrals of a
function, called the Lagrangian, along the path. For many systems an
appropriate Lagrangian is the difference of the kinetic energy and the
potential energy of the system. The choice of a Lagrangian for a system
is not unique.

For any system for which we have a Lagrangian action we can formulate a
system of ordinary differential equations, the Lagrange equations, that
is satisfied by any realizable path. The method of deriving the Lagrange
equations from the Lagrangian is independent of the coordinate system
used to formulate the Lagrangian. One freedom we have in formulation is
that the addition of a total time derivative to a Lagrangian for a
system yields another Lagrangian that has the same Lagrange equations.

The Lagrange equations are a set of ordinary differential equations:
there is a finite state that summarizes the history of the system and is
sufficient to determine the future. There is an effective procedure for
evolving the motion of the system from a state at an instant. For many
systems the state is determined by the coordinates and the rate of
change of the coordinates at an instant.

If there are continuous symmetries in a physical system there are
conserved quantities associated with them. If the system can be
formulated in such a way that the symmetries are manifest in missing
coordinates in the Lagrangian, then there are conserved momenta
conjugate to those coordinates. If the Lagrangian is independent of time
then there is a conserved energy.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-17.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-19.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

