<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-68.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-70.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[5.12  Summary](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_5.12)
-------------------------------------------------

Canonical transformations can be used to reformulate a problem in
coordinates that are easier to understand or that expose some symmetry
of a problem.

In this chapter we have investigated different representations of a
dynamical system. We have found that different representations will be
equivalent if the coordinate-momentum part of the transformation has a
symplectic derivative, and if the Hamiltonian transforms in a specified
way. If the phase-space transformation is time independent, then the
Hamiltonian transforms by composition with the phase-space
transformation. The symplectic condition can be equivalently expressed
in terms of the fundamental Poisson brackets. The Poisson bracket and
the ![](chap1-Z-G-D-23.gif) function are invariant under canonical
transformations. The invariance of ![](chap1-Z-G-D-23.gif) implies that
the sum of the areas of the projections onto fundamental
coordinate-momentum planes is preserved (Poincaré integral invariant) by
canonical transformations.

We can formulate an extended phase space in which time is treated as
another coordinate. Time-dependent transformations are simple in the
extended phase space. In the extended phase space the Poincaré integral
invariant is the Poincaré-Cartan integral invariant. We can also
reformulate a time-independent problem as a time-dependent problem with
fewer degrees of freedom, with one of the original coordinates taking on
the role of time; this is the reduced phase space.

A generating function is a real-valued function of the phase-space
coordinates and time that represents a canonical transformation through
its partial derivatives. We found that every canonical transformation
can be represented by a generating function. The proof depends on the
Poincaré integral invariant (and not on the fact that total time
derivatives can be added to Lagrangians without changing the equations
of motion).

The time evolution of any Hamiltonian system induces a canonical
transformation: if we consider all possible initial states of a
Hamiltonian system and follow all of the trajectories for the same time
interval, then the map from the initial state to the final state of each
trajectory is a canonical transformation. This is true for any interval
we choose, so time evolution generates a continuous family of canonical
transformations.

We generalized this idea to generate continuous canonical
transformations other than those generated by time evolution. Such
transformations will be especially useful in support of perturbation
theory.

In rare cases a canonical transformation can be made to a representation
in which the problem is easily solvable: when all coordinates are cyclic
and all the momenta are conserved. Here we investigated the
Hamilton-Jacobi method for finding such canonical transformations. For
problems for which the Hamilton-Jacobi method works, we find that the
time evolution of the system is given as a canonical transformation.

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-68.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-70.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

