<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-44.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-46.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

[3.9  Standard Map](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_%_sec_3.9)
----------------------------------------------------

We have seen that the surfaces of section for a number of different
problems are qualitatively very similar. They all show two qualitatively
different types of motion: regular motion and chaotic motion. They show
that these types of orbits are clustered: there are regions of the
surface of section that have mostly regular trajectories and other
regions dominated by chaotic behavior. We have also seen a transition to
large-scale chaotic behavior as some parameter is varied. Now we have
learned that the map that takes points on a two-dimensional surface of
section to new points on the surface of section is area preserving. The
sole property that these maps of the section onto itself have in common
(that we know of at this point) is that they preserve area. Otherwise
they are quite distinct. Suppose we consider an abstract map of the
section onto itself that is area preserving, without regard for whether
the map is generated by some dynamical system. Do area-preserving maps
show similar phenomena, or is the dynamical origin of the map crucial to
the phenomena we have found?[^34^](#footnote_Temp_290)

Consider a map of the phase plane onto itself defined in terms of the
dynamical variables ![](chap1-Z-G-D-19.gif) and its \`\`conjugate
momentum'' *I*. The map is

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-194.gif)

</div>

This map is known as the \`\`standard map.''[^35^](#footnote_Temp_291) A
curious feature of the standard map is that the momentum variable *I* is
treated as an angular quantity. The derivative of the map has
determinant one, implying the map is area preserving.

We can implement the standard map:

`(define ((standard-map K) theta I return failure)   (let ((nI (+ I (* K (sin theta)))))     (return ((principal-value :2pi) (+ theta nI))             ((principal-value :2pi) nI)))) `

We use the `explore-map` procedure introduced earlier to use a pointing
device to interactively explore the surface of section. For example, to
explore the surface of section for parameter *K* = 0.6 we use:

`(define window (frame 0.0 :2pi 0.0 :2pi)) (explore-map window (standard-map 0.6) 2000) `

The resulting surface of section, for a variety of orbits chosen with
the pointer, is shown in figure [3.27](#FIGURE_3.27).

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-195.gif)

</div>

The surface of section does indeed look qualitatively similar to the
surfaces of section generated by dynamical systems.

The surface of section for *K* = 1.4 (as shown in
figure [3.28](#FIGURE_3.28)) is dominated by a large chaotic zone. The
standard map exhibits a transition to large-scale chaos near *K* = 1. So
this abstract area-preserving map of the phase plane onto itself shows
behavior that is similar to behavior in the sections generated by a
Hamiltonian dynamical system. Evidently, the area-preservation property
of the dynamics in the phase space plays a determining role for many
interesting properties of trajectories of mechanical systems.

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-196.gif)

</div>

**Exercise 3.13.**  **Fun with Hénon's quadratic map**\
 Consider the map of the plane defined by the equations:

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-197.gif)

</div>

<div align="left">

![](chap3-Z-G-198.gif)

</div>

**a**.  Show that the map preserves area.

**b**.  Implement the map as a procedure. The interesting range of *x*
and *y* is ( `-` 1, 1). There will be orbits that escape. You should
check for values of *x* and *y* that escape from this range and call the
failure continuation when this occurs.

**c**.  Explore the phase portrait of this map for a few values of the
parameter ![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif). The map is particularly interesting
for ![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif) = 1.32 and ![](chap1-Z-G-D-21.gif) = 1.2.
What happens in between?

<div class="smallprint">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

<div class="footnote">

[^34^](#call_footnote_Temp_290) This question was also addressed in the
remarkable paper by Hénon and Heiles, but with a different map from what
we use here.

[^35^](#call_footnote_Temp_291) The standard map has been extensively
studied. Early investigations were by
Chirikov [[12](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Chirikov})] and by
Taylor [[44](book-Z-H-80.html#cite{Taylor})], so the map is sometimes
called the Chirikov-Taylor map. Chirikov coined the term \`\`standard
map,'' which we adopt.

</div>

<div class="navigation">

[Go to <span>[first](book.html),
[previous](book-Z-H-44.html)</span><span>,
[next](book-Z-H-46.html)</span> page<span>;
  </span><span>[contents](book-Z-H-4.html#%_toc_start)</span><span><span>;
  </span>[index](book-Z-H-82.html#%_index_start)</span>]

</div>

activate javascript

